Session Two
T: Okay. I’d like to kind of reach down into your day-to-day world and get
a picture of what things are like for you. I sent you home last week with
this, so I’d like to go back to it and see what is happening. I asked you to
think about three scales. The first scale is the amount of depression and
anger you experienced; let’s put it on a 1 to 10 scale, where 1 is nothing
and 10 is apocalyptic intensity, as intense as you know how to be. The
next question has to do with how much effort is involved in regulating,
manipulating, avoiding, controlling, and changing that level of negative
emotional stuff. I’m not sure it’s just emotional because you’ve got kind of
these critical thoughts that bother you too and I’m not sure exactly, yet,
how to characterize it. But let’s just say “negative emotions” as a way to
start. So, how much struggle is there—and how much focus, attention,
and manipulation are there—from 1 to 10? Is there an incident or a day
or a time when the amount is more in the moderate range than the low
range, or above? Anything come up over the last week that you recall?

C: Hmmm. The back of my mind is working [defusion, self as context;
learning to look at mental processes in flight is a defusion move that also
decreases the attachment to the self]. This is not a great example. This
person does something that annoys me because I think he should know
better. There’s a brief flare, which is how I would characterize most of
my anger. It goes down pretty quick. So I would rate that particular spot
of anger as maybe a 4 to 5, and my degree of effort in containing it was
probably less than the amount of anger that it is, maybe a 2 or a 3, and
not really lasting long at all.
T: Okay. The last scale is workability, which is kind of like, if your life was
like this continuously, how workable a way of living would that be? If you
take this pattern and you project it out, is this something that leads you
in the direction that you’d want to go in?
C: yes and no. It’s something that I’ve been working on all my life. The best
way that I know how to handle negative emotion is to let it flare up; then
it dies down because you can’t sustain any intense emotion for very long.
I let it die down and then put an emotional damper on it because it’s
getting in the way [avoidance, fusion]. If I need to examine this later, I
will. I will try to work out a solution to why this happened and how I can
prevent it in the future. So later, when I have time, I will deal with this
and fix it [avoidance]. And that, in the long term, has not worked, and
that’s one of the reasons I’m here [acceptance]. It is because those flare-
ups are injurious, but I have worked so hard all my life at dealing with it
that it’s gotten me where I am, and I’m happy about where I am in terms
of productivity and whatnot.

T: Okay.
C: In the long term, no, because it doesn’t feel right at some gut level, that
it’s sort of squashing things rather than expanding things or something
[defusion, acceptance].
T: Okay. Good.
C: It looks like it’s not a long-term answer [acceptance]. One of the other
things that I tell myself is that I know that there’s a light at the end of the
tunnel and I don’t have to put up with this forever. One way or another,
I’m going to get out of this situation. Knowing that there is a light at the
end of the tunnel has helped me through a lot of things. This isn’t going
to last forever. I can survive it [avoidance].
T: Right.
C: But, again, it’s like that’s a bandage over these feelings, about which
I would like to be better able to say, “Hey, it’s okay,” you know
[acceptance]. These feelings are pretty high-powered stuff. I know they’re
not hurting anyone else because I don’t let them out, but they’re hurting
me [avoidance]. So I want to be able to deal with them better.
T: Okay. Of those three things, sort of intense negative emotion, control
efforts, and workability, what do you think goes with what? You’ve been
looking at that over the week in the homework. What have you noticed?
In particular, which of these things are hanging together, correlating, part
of the same system, and so on? Do you think that workability goes more
with lower or higher levels of negative emotionality or does it go more
with lower or higher levels of effort at control? What is your sense on
that, instinctively?
C: Well, my instinct is that workability relates to how hard I try to deal with
them as opposed to the emotion itself. The emotion is somewhat separate
[defusion]. I can’t control it [acceptance].

T: yeah.
C: What I do to it and how successful that is seems to be governed by
something else. It’s not just the emotion. I don’t know what that is
[defusion, acceptance].
T: So if the control effort is high, how are things going workability-wise?
C: Not very well.
T: yeah.
C: If I have to try that hard, then I’m shutting down everything else
[acceptance].
T: yeah [pause]. In here over the few sessions we’ve had, you’ve used a lot
of words like “squashing things,” “When things get extreme, I try to
control,” “These things are just wasting my time,” or “I feel like I have to
wash away the bad thoughts.” A lot of metaphors in there: “squashing,”
“washing away,” that all have to do with …
C: Getting rid of.
T: “Getting rid of.” Yeah. Exactly. I think part of what we need to do in here
is to look at how that works—how it’s been working for you. You say, “It
seems to be governed by something else.” If there’s a system here that’s
not workable, and yet it’s persisting, then there’s got to be some glue that
holds it together, something sticky, something tricky. Otherwise we would
just quickly dismantle the system, do something else. That’s not so easy
because it tends to be very tricky. Or something. I think it must be hard
to deal with, hard to dismantle—not hard in the sense of effort; hard in
the sense of tricky.

C: Well, I think the way you learn to get along in the world is by watching
other people. Role models can tell you what they do, offer you suggestions,
offer you feedback about what you’re doing, whatever. You get information
that way, and you also get information by just guessing what it is. “Oh,
they must not be mad” just because they’re not showing it. “They must
not be upset, so it must not be that big a deal.”
T: Right.
C: “If they can get by, then so should I. Therefore, I’m wrong, and they
have something that I don’t” [conceptualized self, defusion; this is tricky
to score, to a degree, because it is being said almost in a third-person
perspective. It seems defused for that reason and may even reflect a
beginning crack in a system of attachment to a conceptualized self. But
it is possible this is just an attempt by the client to rescue the therapist
from the therapist’s bumbling]. I think that’s a source of a lot of my self-
imposed regulations about how I should be feeling and how I should be
[defusion; he can see the process as separate from the content].
T: Does that go on now? Do you find yourself doing that?
C: Oh, all the time. I care about what other people think way too much
[defusion, values]. And I know that I do that, but it still governs
practically everything I do. “How is it going to look if I do that?” “What
are people going to think if I do that?” “How do I cover my ass on
this one?” “How can I get what I want but make it look like it’s what
they want?” [defusion; the client is beginning to notice the process of
cognition instead of just living inside cognitive products].
T: Do you think people around you would suspect that about you?
C: For sure [acceptance; this is acceptance because he was willing to admit
to something that might evoke guilt or self-judgment]. I think that people
who really know me, parents and good friends and stuff, are probably
aware that I can be chameleon-like [acceptance, values; there may be
a fragment of values here because the client is implying that this is not
what he wants to be about]. Probably fewer people know it than I think
know it.
T: I don’t know you well enough to really say this, but in terms of how you
carry yourself and your style, the immediate presentation is one of “I’m
competent and I’m going to do it how I like it, and you better adjust to
it.” As I’m saying that, it sounds almost as if I’m saying you are hostile in
tone, and I don’t mean it that way—but maybe a bit rebellious.
C: For sure. Yes. I can see that. I know that there are people who perceive
me as being brave and getting things done, because that’s the way I want
to be, and it works sometimes. But if I’m challenged, boy, I retreat real
quickly [acceptance, self as context; self is scored because there is a sense
of looking at the act, not literally buying into the act].
T: yeah. Okay, that’s cool. Probably people who don’t know you well put you
in one place, and then as they get to know you, they see you as sort of
more of a marshmallow gorilla than an actual gorilla. Is that fair?
C: I do sort of put on a show [acceptance, self as context].

T: Last time we were talking about this sense of being stuck. Where you’ve
gone here really does fit in with it. It’s worth just kind of putting a
little point on it as to what this thing is about. What is all the digging
about? See if this isn’t right: part of what that effort is about is getting
control of the world inside your skin—your thoughts, feelings, memories,
predispositions, and so on, and if we could just sort of get those in line,
then things would be okay. That is kind of what our minds tell us. It says
to evaluate them, and there are certain ones you like and certain ones
you don’t like. So I’ve got to get rid of the bad ones. But the problem with
that is that there’s a fair amount of evidence from a lot of different areas
that if you try to go frontally after the world inside the skin, it loops back
around on you.
There’s this guy at Harvard, Dan Wegner, who does research in
which he brings people in and he tells them something not to think
about. And then he has them talk aloud as they do other things. Well,
sure enough, if you tell them not to think about it, then that thought
goes down for a bit and then way up. That’s been shown also with
emotions. If you have people put their hands in cold water and you say,
“Now whatever you do, don’t let yourself feel any pain there” (versus,
you know, “I really want you to notice how your hand feels, and if it’s
hurting, really notice that”) and then you look at what happens. It’s more
painful to try not to have the pain. Furthermore, later on, they give them
a little vibration that is barely negative, and the people who have been
suppressing the pain earlier now will rate that as quite painful. Other
people will rate it as a vibration.
So pushing things down has this kind of sensitization thing where
you’re looking for something that’s going to intrude in some way. You’re
getting yourself in a defensive place, and things look more hostile than
they would otherwise look. They look scarier. Kind of a metaphor for that
would be like if I could hook you up to a polygraph that can’t be fooled,
and while I watch the readout, I tell you, “Don’t get nervous.” Now to
motivate you here, I’m going to hold a gun to your head and if you get
nervous, I’m going to shoot you. So don’t get nervous. In circumstances
like that, the very effort not to be nervous, because bad things will then
happen, is enough to make you nervous. So, for example, when your mind
really gets critical, I’m guessing, you get critical about how critical you are.
Do you not?
C: Mm-hmm.

T: Just consider the possibility that part of why anger, depression, criticalness,
and so on, sticks is that it’s stuck into a loop of trying to do something
about itself that paradoxically amplifies it. Or it even doesn’t amplify
it—it sort of grinds it in, glues it up, makes it stick. What would you do if
you didn’t do what you always do?
C: Well, I know there are lots of things that I could try that I haven’t.
T: Like what?
C: Do a mantra. “I’m not mad, I’m not mad, I’m not mad,” or some other
distracting-type thing like singing [avoidance]. I could stop whatever it
was that I was doing, except that sometimes it is me that’s doing whatever
it is that’s making me mad. I could just stop. I mean I’d have to do the
physical correlation because supposedly you could tell your mind to stop:
“Stop thinking that.” Train it to think, “Oh, I’m on that merry-go-round
again. I’m going to get off.” You have to force yourself to think something
else [avoidance, fusion]. But then you get into all that, if you try to stop
yourself from thinking about it, then you’ll come back and gnaw at it
like a scab or something [pause]. So I don’t know what else to do, to be
honest with you [silence] [defusion].


T: So here’s the thing that I want you to notice. And this is exactly where
I wanted to go. Things that you listed, you know, like chant your brains
out, mantra yourself into bliss or something …
C: Are temporary fixes.
T: yeah, and the other thing is, they’re driven toward a purpose. They have
a goal. What’s the goal?
C: To get away.

T: Exactly right. What I want to put on the table is the possibility that your
experience is valid. It is not your fault that this is not working. It can’t
work because the system itself is set up in such a way that it can’t work—
like the gun to the head sitting down at the polygraph. If I’ve got a good
enough polygraph—and you do, you’ve got your own nervous system—
and I’ve got a good enough gun—and you do, it’s your own self-esteem
and sense of life progress—it doesn’t matter what you do once you’re
in that situation. You’re already toast. There isn’t a way to make that
arrangement work. Is there? This isn’t a matter of a technique or method:
“Well, I’ll get in the seat and I’ll get the polygraph and I’ll put the gun
to my head and then instead of doing this I’ll do that.” No. I mean, the
system is bad. Are you with me on that?
C: Mm-hmm.
T: We have this fantasy that there’s some guru somewhere that can get
away with this kind of thing (“and then the swami controlled all of his
emotions”), but I’ve never met that swami. If you know one, introduce
me and we shall see. Here’s what I’m saying: consider the possibility that
the method doesn’t add anything—that it’s the system, the agenda, the
purpose that matters. It’s kind of like, if digging is the problem, how you
dig doesn’t matter. Whether it’s a teaspoon or a steam shovel, it’s the same
thing. It’s the digging that’s the problem; it’s not the implement being
used. It’s the agenda that’s the problem, not the control method. Do you
know what I mean?
C: Mm-hmm.
T: We’ve got to face the agenda itself, head on. So when I say, “What’s the
alternative?” look at that list that you came up with. They’re different
tools but are they the same agenda? So suppose the agenda is the problem.
C: So what’s the opposite of that, I mean, if you’re trying to get away from
your feelings or squash your feelings or whatever, then what are you going
to do? Embrace your feelings? Please, yes! [fusion; you would have to hear
the tape to know that the client is being sarcastic when he said, “Please,
yes!”].


T: But even then, you know there are lots of folks out there that try to do
that. But even then, what I want to know is … in the service of what?
C: The same thing—to get rid of them. It’s like going through the side door
but you still go in there [defusion; despite the client’s sarcasm, another
part of himself sees the game].
T: you still go in there. Beautiful. It’s the agenda that’s the problem and not
the technical details. This is a funny kind of bit of knowledge, if it is so,
because you notice you can’t use it in the service of a normal agenda. If
you say something like “Okay, well, I’ll just embrace my feelings” well,
for what purpose? To get rid of them? In the world outside the skin,
there’s a rule I think that kind of describes how things work, which is
pretty reliable, and this is what language evolved for: “If you don’t want
something, figure out how to get rid of it, and get rid of it.” Ninety-five
C: percent of the time it works great. It works great in creating the room we
are in so that the rain won’t come in on us. There’s a light here, so it is
not dark. We’ve progressed enormously in being able to regulate health,
move around at hundreds of miles an hour, call people up and talk to
them on the other side of the planet. I mean we can do incredible things
that are a matter of manipulating and controlling our environment. But,
also, we’re the only species that kills themselves. We are the only one that
struggles with mortality. The only one that gets depressed, anxious, and
so on, even when things are going great on the outside. That rule works
great out in the world, but the problem is, we don’t know when to stop
doing it, because doing it is what our minds evolved to do.
The way that we deal with the external world is to be able to describe it,
to understand it. Okay, so if we apply that to our mental processes and
we say, “That isn’t working here,” does that mean that we cannot describe
our emotions or that the labels that we are using are wrong? Or just don’t
apply? I mean, do we have to back all the way up and say, “We don’t
know what’s going on; we can’t do anything about it”? I mean, I think
this psychology goes around and around. We can’t accept that; we’ve got
to keep trying.

T: Those are good questions. But they’re twisted questions. You know, when
we describe things in the external world, that’s also part of a larger thing:
it’s to understand it so we can manipulate it, so that we can change it.
C: Right.
T: Language evolved so we could make things be different, right? We’ve got
to figure out the external world. But the world inside the skin? I don’t
know how to cordon off language in such a way that you won’t talk about
what’s going on. But consider the possibility that the simple agenda,
figuring out how to get rid of it when applied inside the skin, just doesn’t
work, that there it’s something more like If you’re not willing to have it,
you’ve got it.
C: So the correlation is, if you’re willing to have it, if you accept it, then it
becomes not a problem [avoidance].
T: Neat. Depends on what the purpose is and what you mean by “not a
problem.”
C: That’s too much like the side-door thing.
T: Could be, couldn’t it? Let us look and see if that doesn’t fit. What does
your experience tell you about your own internal life? It could actually be
true that if you’re not willing to have it, you’ve got it.

C: It depends.
T: We need to look at the long term because we can’t trust the short ones.
You’re in here. So that’s suspicious.
C: Right.
T: How did that happen?
C: Well, we’ve kind of been coming at this thing from all these different
angles for these three times now, and I agree. Sometimes I think my
distraction stuff is working very well, but long-term? I don’t know that
there’s anything else to do. I don’t know very many people who do
anything differently than I do [fusion].
T: yeah, I know.
C: So, you know, maybe I can just learn to live with the doubts and the bad
times and just go on, you know? But I don’t want to admit that. I don’t
really like human beings and I don’t want to admit that we can’t get
beyond this pathetic state that we’re in [conceptualized self]. Sometimes
I think, well, either we have a lot of evolving to do or we won’t get there
and we’ll blow ourselves up first [avoidance, not present].
T: yeah. It’s hard to look at. And even this moment.
C: In my own personal life I haven’t ever really challenged myself in a way
that I’d like to be able to die and say that I had lived [values]. I’m not
afraid of death, I mean, God, I’ve tasted it a couple of times; it’s scary as
hell. But even scarier is to open a door in your mind and look at what’s
in there and go “ew” [conceptualized self, values; it is a bit of a stretch to
put in values here, but the sense in hearing this is that this comment is
painful, not just because of content, but because life is not being lived].
T: yeah.
C: I may not be able to change that [fusion].

T: Interesting thought.
C: That’s what I’m kind of looking at here. I want to be a better person for
going through this type of thing. I want to live a better life [values].
T: Cool. Let’s move toward that.
C: I’m not sure that I can. But I don’t have to look too far in the future as to
what happens if I don’t. I’ll probably go on as I have been going for years,
and then in a few more years I’ll try again. I’ll find another therapist and
see what his or her thing is, his or her way, and I guess the goal would be
to be getting rid of pain or whatever. I don’t know [defusion, values; again
values shows up with the connotation that this is a life not being lived].
T: [Pause] You just touched on something here a few seconds ago. It looked
like you were talking about opening a door into something you really care
about. I was just watching your eyes, and it looked like you just cracked
the door open. I don’t know. Right here. Now. Am I fantasizing?

C: I told you what was most important to me as a human being, which is not
something that I tell very many people [acceptance, values].
T: I could see it. Just for a second something kind of went across your face as
if there was something important in there.
C: I mean, that’s what I want [pause]. That’s my stated and internal goal
in life. It was to know whether there’s hope for human beings [values].
Are we the creatures of value, or are the gifts that we have that make us
human wasted on us?
T: Let’s find out.
C: That is a scary proposition [acceptance, present]. I think there are a lot
of people that don’t look at whatever it is. It’s not about money. With
some people, I think they find it in a marital relationship. But for me that
isn’t there, that’s not the challenge. My kids are certainly part of it. But
I feel like I am in here to work on me; it’s finding something in me that
is honorable. I’m not sure what it is. I’ve always had this feeling that I’m
hiding from something in myself [values].
T: Good. And what if finding that requires getting in touch with your
feelings? What if some of those answers were in the very painful things
you’ve pushed away? Suppose the main thing that would help you here is
your own pain. You’ve got to kind of look inside yourself and see if you’re
at a place where you hurt enough, you’re tired enough, or exasperated
enough, you’re sick of it enough to show up. Even though you don’t know
what you’re doing, you don’t know what I’m talking about exactly, and
the whole thing might just be psychobabble bullshit, and what good is
it? Even with the thought that “Maybe I’m being manipulated and I
don’t know what’s going to happen.” Even with all that, the fact is, this
is painful. “I’ve run this thing out. I don’t know what to do. Whatever
it is, it’s not this.” That’s our biggest ally right now. It’s just being fed
up and sick and tired, and if we’re going to try something different,
fundamentally different, we’re going to kind of follow the pain inside.
If it’s something fundamentally different, then that will likely be scary,
confusing, whatever. We have to hang on to this not having knowledge
of what the alternative is, because right now anything that seemed logical
would just loop back into the same verbal system. Just call a spade a
spade. Am I happy with how my life is going or not?
C: Oh man, I’m not.

T: Those are pretty important little animals out there, who aren’t humans.
If they had all this, they’d be as happy as they know how to be. We
have all this and we’re still not happy. Because that last little 5 percent
is the world inside the skin, and it just doesn’t seem to work that way.
It works the exact opposite way: if you’re not willing to have it and you
run away, you’re in it. Conversely, you can’t use that information for
anything without dropping the agenda because if you say, “Okay, well
then I’m going to feel whatever comes up,” the purpose of it is the same
thing—control.
C: yeah. I can’t possibly imagine another way of working it [fusion].
T: Right, and so all we need right now is not that, because that would be
another example of your mind trying to do it. Let’s not imagine another
way to do it.
C: Zowie. Let’s not find another distraction.
T: Exactly. Your mind is not ready to let go of this agenda because it’s wired
into your mind. Yet it’s not working. Hang on to that, and that’s not
psychobabble. You don’t have to have any faith in that at all; in fact, I
encourage you to not believe a word I’m saying. It’s not going to help you
to believe it anyway. But there is something you can trust, which is your
own experience. I bet there is something in you saying, “I’m ready to
move ahead from here.” Trust that. If you can’t trust that, I don’t know
what you can trust; I mean, let your own experience tell you.
C: I do trust that. That doesn’t mean I’m not scared to go ahead. That’s
why I’m here. I know that I could go down farther, that I could hit the
bottom, I could lose it, and I can see that that could happen with my
business, and I don’t want that to happen [fusion, avoidance]. I can tell
myself that it’s not working and know that it’s true. It isn’t. I can say,
“Make it work,” but you know, it’s very “blech” [acceptance, values; the
tone on the tape makes it clear that he is fed up with “making it work”
and is ready to move on—thus these labels].
T: yeah, exactly. Good. If you’re tired enough of trying to make it work,
that’s cool. That’s your main ally.
C: I can see that I have to remind myself of that. If it gets unpleasant or if I
get scared, if I’m losing, you ought to feel like you have a grip on yourself,
reality or whatever [conceptualized self].

T: Somehow what we need to do is let go of something that you don’t quite
know how to let go of. Before we try to do anything else, we need to
create a context in which that’s possible. Consider the possibility that
we’ve got this sort of thin overlay of language that’s only been around one
hundred thousand years—not very long in geological time. Writing, and
all the rest of modern language, is only about four thousand years old.
Our ability to figure out how to get rid of things is quite recent. We’ve
only really been evolving culturally a few thousand years as a verbal
species. But language is sitting on top of some primitive functions that go
back as long as there’s been life on the planet. So it’s not reasonable to
expect us to turn and do something other than evaluate and manipulate
and control, which is all about what minds know how to do. If your
thoughts or feelings look like they’re going to harm you, then you engage
programming that’s millions and millions of years old that’s all about “Get
me out of here.”
So what we have to do before we do anything else is create a context
in which it’s possible to face monsters without having our lives on the
line. It is sort of like this: Let’s say your mind is like a computer, and
we’ve got two computers here side by side that are exactly the same.
They’re loaded up with the same software, same data, and so on. I type
in a little string of words and hit enter and I get a readout on the screen.
Because the data and the programs are the same, the readout is pretty
likely to be the same, right? So imagine we’ve got two computers, one
here, one there, and they’re exactly the same, and the same input is put
in, and we push the key on both. Okay? Same readout comes out on the
screen, very reliable.
Situation number one: The operator over here is very into what’s
on that screen, like, metaphorically sitting right up on it. She’s almost
forgetting that she’s watching a screen, like when you go to the movies
and you forget that you’re watching the movie, you’re so into it.
Situation number two: The operator in front of the machine is aware
that there’s a distinction—metaphorically, the operator is sitting back, a
little bit away. Let’s say the output is “Life’s not worth living” or “Deep
down, people are really no good” or “Deep down, there’s something wrong
with me.” Okay? Critical thought. If that comes up for this person (the
one sitting really close to the screen), this is bad news. This is something
that has to change. Paradoxically, the degree to which they believe it
affects the degree to which they have to change it. You with me?
C: Mm-hmm.
T: This person over here [person sitting farther away in situation number
two] is sitting back and he sees that output, “Deep down, there’s
something wrong with me” on the screen. Is there anything that has
to change? No, it is just some words that popped up. He might say to a
friend, “Gee, come over here and look at this. I typed this in, and this is
what I got.” Are you with me?
C: Mm-hmm.
T: My point is this. If you are your mental machinery, there isn’t anything
you can do except try to regulate the machinery. Because it means what
it says it means. So when you think bad things about yourself, you’ve got
to do something about that. Or if you feel bad things, you’ve got to do
something about that. But if there’s the distinction between you and your
mental machinery, why do you necessarily have to do anything about it?
Maybe it’s possible to have a little bit of space there, a little bit of blue
sky, a little bit of fresh air.
C: For sure, well, that’s why I know that I’m not a depressed person; it’s my
biochemistry that makes me depressed, so I take drugs. I don’t have to
deal with that, it’s not who I am [acceptance, self as context; the scoring
is a bit difficult however—see below].
T: yeah, actually I think that’s one of the most helpful things about a disease
model is that it instantly does certain things like that. Sometimes at a
cost, but you know.

C: If you’re saying that I am not my mental machinery, if who I am is
not necessarily what I think, or how I behave … um, if I can’t control
those behaviors, then they will affect who I am. They will get me in
trouble [fusion]. I am ultimately responsible for those behaviors. If I need
help controlling them, then I go to the doctor and make him give me
antidepressant medication. That has worked, for the most part.

T: Well, you will be held responsible for what you do, for sure. But we’re
talking about things here that aren’t necessarily outside the skin at all. I
mean, they lead to things that might be outside the skin, and that’s where
the cost would be.
C: Right.
T: But the struggle starts way earlier, does it not?
C: Right, so does it matter that my mental machinery and I are two separate
things? [defusion, self as context] I don’t judge what I think, or my
feelings; they’re there and they rule me. I don’t want them to. I want to
control them [avoidance].
T: Right. Well, but paradoxically the place in which they rule you may be
the place in which you try to have control. This is the negative emotion.
[The therapist holds out a piece of paper perpendicular to the floor and
moves it toward the client in such a way that he puts up his hand to stop
its progress.] All right, now I’m going to try to get it to touch you, and
don’t let that happen; make sure it doesn’t get anywhere near you. [The
therapist pushes while the client pushes back, moving the paper in various
directions to keep it from touching his body. They continue for several
seconds with considerable effort being expended.] Now I want to ask you
something. How much is this thing controlling your behavior?
C: A lot.
T: A lot. Right. Now, I’m going to throw this thing in your lap, okay? Put
your hands to the side. You don’t have to do anything; your lap will catch
it, okay? Notice that you might want to put your hands out, but don’t.
[The therapist tosses a sheet of paper on the client’s lap, then pauses
and tosses another sheet and then another.] How much are these things
controlling you now?
C: Not at all.
T: So, there’s a paradox here. Suppose these sheets are your thoughts and
feelings. Your mind says, “I can’t have these things control me.” Right?
But what if controlling them is to be controlled by them? Because if you
can’t have them control you, that means they’re very, very important.
Something shows up that’s not supposed to be there; this is danger time.
So your hand goes up, and you start struggling. Is that control? Aren’t
they controlling you?
C: But where are they coming from, if not from me? Aren’t I bad because
they’re coming out of me? [conceptualized self]


T: Mary had a little …
C: Lamb.
T: Where did that come from?
C: I was taught it.
T: Presumably. Do you remember when you first learned it?
C: No.
T: yeah, it’s just part of the programming, right? Okay, now I’m going to
say the same words again and I want you to make absolutely certain sure
and be positive that not one bit of your response has anything to do with
lamb. All right? Get ready. Mary had a little …
C: Fish.
T: Okay, did you do it?
C: yes.
T: How did you know to say yes?
C: Thought processes. You know, it’s an animal, but it’s not … I can’t say
this … can’t say … [pause; chuckles] … yeah.
T: Right. You can’t say it because then you touch …
C: Lamb.
T: So lambs are in there. It’s “fish—not lamb” not just “fish.” But that
means it’s related to lamb! I’m going to say something again, and watch
your mind processes. Make sure what comes up is not what usually comes
up. It’s not related to it, doesn’t touch, doesn’t have any contact with it
whatsoever [pause]. I’m not a good person; deep down I’m really …
C: Bad. … There’s got to be something to replace that with! I mean, if you’re
not going to do it, you’ve got to have something else.
T: If you try to replace it, you only increase it. Here’s the thing: I’m with
you in the sense that being a bad person is not what you want, but that
is not what is happening. These are thoughts. These are feelings. Do you
remember how old you were when you first thought that you were bad?
C: Really, really young. Really young.
T: you can’t have the ability to evaluate things and apply them to everything
else and not apply them to yourself. Find something in this room that you
can’t criticize [they both look around]. The cheesy picture, you like this
picture? You like the frame? The flaking gold paint? They probably spent
a lot of money on those pictures! I bet you that one was at least $12.95.
They probably got it at K-Mart. You’re pretty good at evaluating things,
right? Is there anything in here you can’t criticize and judge [they both
look around]. [whispering] Why are you going to get off scot-free? How
would that be?
So what do you put on top of it? My guess is you put achievement on
top of it. You’re smart, successful, put some effort into school. Right? You
put Mr. Smarty Pants on top of it, no? But here’s the thing. “I’m bad …
No, really I’m good. See here, look what I can do.” … Doesn’t it stick you
even more to “I’m bad?” Doesn’t it kind of creep up: “I’m a fraud”?
C: Mm-hmm, that’s good … hmmm. … We were talking about these two
people on their computers and how there was the concept that you are or
are not your machinery … mental machinery.
T: Right.
C: And I wasn’t … I still don’t know if you’re trying to say that you see a self
as separate from that or not [self as context].


T: Watch your mind. Watch it right now. Watch how it works. By
programming. If you are it, then we’re in real trouble, because number
one, you’ve got all kinds of crap in your head. If you can’t get rid of “Mary
had a little lamb,” how are you going to get rid of “I’m bad”? Look at all
of what you’ve done … all the Mr. Smarty Pants things you’ve done; the
machine doesn’t know how to stop doing what it does. In that metaphor,
you know, the operator does not have personal investment in what’s on
the readout screen because there’s a distinction, but over here there’s
no distinction [between the two computer screens]. There is personal
investment, and so you’ve got to change it. This operator over here
doesn’t have to change it [person who is back from the computer screen].
What difference does it make? It’s words on a screen. Where did you get
your self-critical thoughts, for example? How old were you when they
showed up?
C: I don’t know, three or four, something like that.
T: Do you know where they come from?
C: I can guess. But it’s all happening when you’re starting to learn who you
are, developing your language skills, applying labels to things, getting
along with other people, and having to create boundaries. You’re learning
“yes” and you’re learning “no,” what’s okay and what’s not okay, and you’re
so young and impressionable that the “not okays” come down harder than
they would when you’re older. So you take these lessons to heart. Or you
don’t and you become a psychopath or something.


T: We’ve got to find a place where it’s safe to be you and to turn and face
these monsters. That’s kind of what I was trying to put out there, and I
think we’ll work on that next time. If we can find a place where you can
stand, where you’re not at stake—who you are is not at stake—then it
might be possible to get in there and muck around and look at the slimy
lizards that are running around in your head and history. Okay. There’s
some dangling ends there, but I’m not going to try and tie them up
because we’ve burned enough time here. I will see you next week.
