T: So how are you doing?
C: I didn’t do my homework because whenever I started to struggle with my
feelings, or whatever, it wasn’t convenient to be writing [inaction]. At
other times when I could be writing, there didn’t seem to be much to
recall, and it didn’t seem to be very relevant. I thought, “Well, if what
we are doing is looking at a new way of doing something, that doesn’t
necessarily mean that you have to throw out everything else you have
already learned.” And perhaps we could leave that exercise and just
continue on with whatever it is you wanted to present as an additional
means of coping [avoidance].
T: Hmmm. Tricky business this homework. Besides it being hard to do
because of time, what else was in the way of doing it?
C: It didn’t seem worth my time. The idea of placing a number on the means
I was using before, and them being completely ineffective. I know that is
your goal. You want to make it more easy or acceptable to embrace a new
way of trying something or dealing with something.
T: Well, you’re several steps out ahead of me.
C: Well, I read a journal article on ACT, you know [avoidance, fusion; this
is a distraction, which is a kind of avoidance. It also would move the issue
into one of theory, thus the fusion score].
T: Interesting. My purpose was more to see how it is than to have it be a
particular way. We all have investments in whatever our thoughts are.
The whole thing that we’re working on here is trying to, at least in part,
put those investments in on the basis of what works rather than on what’s
reasonable. That includes me. And who says I’m so smart? I view myself
as a hired hand. I work for you. It doesn’t mean that I’m willing to take
your thoughts or mine as being literally true. It does mean that you’re the
boss in here in an important way, and the bottom line is your bottom
line. Take the measures we were looking at. They are all your bottom
line: how much suffering you’ve done and how much effort has gone on
and whether or not whatever is happening there is moving you ahead
toward what you really want or backward. Those are pretty basic things
… that don’t have to have numbers. But I do like numbers.
C: I don’t like numbers [fusion, avoidance].
T: Well, they make it easier for me to know if there’s change.
C: It seems like putting apples with oranges. I can’t trust my assessment of
that stuff, and it’s not convenient to do it at the time. I can’t just leap
from what I’m doing.
T: Hmmm. I asked you to do it once, at the end of the day, actually.
All of this is also functionally avoidant. The therapist’s last response is okay, but
we know it will not really go anywhere because the client knows this full well. Another
way to respond to this situation would be to work with him to contact what is getting in
the way and then challenge him to confront it in the service of his values. For example,
another response could be “I get that it is not convenient, and what might you gain by
working with me on this?”
C: I won’t remember at the end of the day. And I don’t want to remember.
It’s like, why dredge it up again? [avoidance] It wasn’t fun or useful or
anything else at the time. I don’t know why I’m so resistant to doing that;
I really don’t know [acceptance]. I couldn’t tell you. Although it doesn’t
seem very relevant; it pisses me off.
T: Well, that’s okay that you’re resistant. I think that’s fine. I would advise
that the both of us in here take that as grist for the mill.
C: Right after I saw you the last time, I was at work when one of my
waitresses called up—she’s one of the ones that I’m having the most
trouble with—and she asked this stupid question that she shouldn’t
have had to ask because I left complete instructions about what she was
supposed to do on her shift. I felt this “swoosh” and thought, “I want to
strangle her!” And I’m saying, “Be calm, be cool; it’ll eventually subside.
There’s no point in getting mad. It’s obviously a miscommunication; she
didn’t understand what I wanted her to do.” It’s like, all right, why be
mad? [fusion, not present, avoidance] It’s probably my fault that she didn’t
understand.
T: Okay.
C: If I try to put it into your task, I was probably an 8 on the mad scale and
an 8 on the effort scale. My effort is always equal to the feeling. I guess
it must have been a little bit more because I’m able to push it down and
stop it [avoidance], dissipate the emotion so that reason can come back
into play because the reason is where things happen [fusion]. Emotion is
not a productive state. It’s enjoyable or it’s destructive in my opinion—
that’s it. And when it’s destructive, then it needs to be controlled or it
can cause damage [fusion, avoidance].
T: yeah. Last time actually, we came up on your models and it’s …
C: My family—they’re not very good models. You think adults have all the
answers and they’ve managed to control the beasts within them, and
actually you realize when you grow up that at best they’ve caged the
beasts but they’re still there.
T: Probably caged them at a cost, too.
C: For sure.
T: If you don’t stomp the negative ones down, they’re going to …
C: I’ve let them out a couple of times to see what would happen. I’ve
experimented with throwing things around [avoidance]. You break things,
and people look at you like you’re an idiot and then you have to pay for
the stuff you’ve broken. And beyond that, you injure or damage people’s
trust in you; they want to be able to count on you to not be something
that’s weird.
T: But the throwing is not an emotion; that’s an action, right?
C: That’s true.
T: Actions can create serious problems if they’re not appropriate to the
situation. Anger is the most difficult one because it seemingly links up
with action so tightly. And we almost talk about it as if it’s an action.
T: Do you think it’s possible to experience anger without experiencing
physiological reactions to the anger? Can you divorce the two or teach
yourself to?
T: I don’t know, but physiological reactions aren’t behavior either.
C: No, but they’re scary; they’re uncomfortable; who wants them? [avoidance,
fusion] Wham, wham, wham, or you’re getting cold or your eyes are
crossing or whatever.
T: I don’t want to conclude anything here, I’m just asking: how much do you
know about that when you are feeling feelings, period, just feeling them
without running from them or regulating them, and so on? Put aside the
issue of behavior; I think it’s distinct. What I’m asking is, how unpleasant
is anxiety, fear, anger, and so on, if you’re not adding to it by efforts to
regulate it?
C: I find it very unpleasant because my center is my stomach, and it just
starts turning, and I will have diarrhea whether I’m too excited or too
upset.
T: So positive emotions are also costly?
C: yes.
T: And yet, am I wrong on this? We were talking about this last time, and I
think you said you are afraid of emotions. Maybe “afraid” is not what you
said.
C: Leery.
T: Leery. And what you seemed to say almost sounded like, “I kind of know
I need to go there. God knows I don’t want to, and it sounds like so much
crap to me.”
C: For sure, I think that’s close to what was happening.
T: Okay. So it sounds like you are of two minds about emotions. Would it be
possible to take your ambivalence with you? You don’t have to put it away;
you don’t have to be clear in your mind about it [pause]. What I’m asking
is, is it okay to be ambivalent?
C: Sure. It’s also possible to not be [avoidance]. I can relate it to things that
I’ve done or tried. I was really scared, dragging my feet the whole way,
knowing that I had to at the same time. So, I gotta, I just gotta let go of
the branch and drop, whatever.
T: Well, I want to go back and pick up a little strand from the beginning
of the session. You have the Internet and you did what people with the
Internet do: you looked up the stuff written about ACT. And now there’re
lots of words in your head—things to be right and wrong about. We’ll
have to deal with that. So I cop to the fact that I do have an angle I
want to pursue here—we went over that in our intake session—and it’s
more important to do what you’ve hired me to do than to be right about
writings or theory or something other than what really works for you.
C: That’s good, otherwise I’d fire you.
T: So there was that strand when you came today that sounded like I’m
trying to make you think something, make you believe something, make
you …
C: Persuade me.
T: That’s okay [pause]. I don’t want to persuade you. Just consider the
possibility that your mind is not your friend here—nor your enemy. It’s
evolved for a different purpose. It’s not who you are. It’s a tool you use,
and it’s blabbing to you constantly and claiming to be you. Claiming to
know everything. Claiming to be so smart. This is how minds are. All
minds—mine too. What’s the exact opposite of persuasion? It’s something
more like showing up with this morning-to-night chatter. What I’m more
interested in than persuading is to see if we can show up with our minds.
Take an attitude more like a dispassionate observer who is willing to
just sort of sit and watch what goes on in here, and also what’s gone on
in your life, and just call a spade a spade. With that sense of, if you see
something, then you saw it, and if you felt something, then you felt it. Not
adding or subtracting anything; it’s sort of just watching the raw data. I
don’t think that’s persuasion. It’s something more just like …
C: The viewpoint?
T: yeah, the viewpoint is not an intellectual viewpoint. The viewpoint is you
sitting there looking at your life. That’s a viewpoint. I don’t mean like my
opinion is. Because that’s all mind stuff.
C: Well, that’s easy, that’s easy; I can buy that. I can agree with you
immediately that my mind is often not my friend. That I want to tell it
to shut up and I want to control it [avoidance]. And I can step aside and
look at me and go, “something is wrong.”
T: Right.
C: But that doesn’t mean I can’t sever the feeling, I mean, the gut going
along with the mind. So it’s the physical manifestations of what’s going on
in my mind that I really want to stop [avoidance].
T: That’s your hook.
C: yes.
T: Hmmm. And where can you stand that you would not get hooked?
Imagine that there’s this chessboard. It’s out in all directions, and there
are pieces on it and there are two teams. Say there are white ones and
black ones, and they’re fighting each other. And they’re sort of working
out as a team. The black team and the white team fight each other.
Right? Now in this metaphor, these pieces are your memories, your
thoughts, your bodily sensations, what your stomach does, your pull to
behave with predispositions, memories, bad experiences, good experiences,
nice thoughts, good memories, calm moments, and so on. It’s just all the
stuff. And indeed, they kind of ally with each other. Some hang out over
here and some hang out together over there. So a thought like “I’m bad”
or “Life sucks” or whatever probably hangs out with moments when you’ve
been depressed, angry, hurt, anxious, and so on. Or gruesome memories
or scary memories or things you’ve done that you’re not proud of, and
so on. Conversely, you know, warm fuzzy feelings kind of hang out with
other warm fuzzy things.
All right, your normal move is to nominate some of those pieces as
who you are, or who you want to be—the team that you want to have
win. And most people nominate the good ones. So you go off and you try
to do something about the bad ones. Okay. Metaphorically it’s sort of like
jumping up on the back of one of the queens and riding off to do battle
with all of your private monsters.
A couple of things happen when you do that. One is that the
monsters get more salient and central. Which they would, because you’re
focusing on them and if you are not willing to have them, you do. Doing
battle against them shows they’re very important. Number two, although
the goal is usually to sort of push them away (and get them off at least in
a dark, dusty corner so you won’t have to see them, or ideally even push
them off the board, checkmate the other team, and win), in fact, I’ve met
precious few people for whom that’s happened. Usually what happens is,
at best, they get kind of obscured but you still know that they’re there.
Like, think of a really traumatic memory that you’ve got.
C: Okay.
T: Find something that really hurt or frightened you. That memory, if it’s
a black piece on the board, unlike a real game of chess, isn’t it true that
that piece has not fully been removed from the board? Can you even
conceive of a universe in which that memory won’t continue to be part of
your life?
C: No, these thoughts are there somewhere.
T: Okay, so we ride off to do battle against them, except it doesn’t seem to
work very well. Plus, whole great portions of you are your own enemy. If
whole great portions of you are your own enemy, there’s something wrong
with you.
C: Well, I wouldn’t put it that way. I mean, in terms of your metaphor yes,
that’s what you say, but I don’t believe that.
T: Okay, but at a higher level: if you’re in that posture, where you’re sort of
somehow trying to battle with your own monsters, you’re in a posture in
which the enemy is you.
C: Okay, gotcha, you’re right. I follow what you’re saying. Although, your
friend, your therapist, your mother would say, well, you can’t help that.
That happened when you were in sixth grade and you did what you knew
how to do then and you don’t need to feel ashamed, you don’t need to be
embarrassed, you can let it rest. And of course, you can’t [acceptance].
T: Right. So this is exactly …
C: So it’s not working.
T: This is the enculturation we get, which basically says, “Well, just put that
out of your mind, honey”—explain it away. This is kind of like, here’s this
black piece, and it’s really quite unpleasant, and it’s associated with other
things that are unpleasant, like how your body reacts when you even
think of it. It’s like your stomach—the black piece comes over and stands
next to it, you know. Here is how we usually battle: we take this piece
called “It wasn’t my fault,” and we’ll throw it at the black pieces and see
what happens. Well, I don’t know if your mind is like mine, but my mind
says something like this when I throw one like that out: I’ll say, “It’s not
my fault.” And I’ll hear back an echo something like …
C: “Yes, but … you should have, you could have.”
T: “You could have.” Exactly. Okay, so there’s a white team and a black
team. “I’m perfect” is over here, and over here is the thought “There’s
nothing about me that’s the tiniest bit worthwhile.” If this is 100 percent
true, what happens to this one? This is absolutely positively 100 percent
no reservation, permanently 100 percent true; what happens to that one?
C: Then that one can’t be.
T: At all, can’t even be thought—it literally disappears, right? It’s dead. Now,
if you’re sitting on the back of the white queen, that means this guy over
here is your blood enemy. Your life is on the line to the point that if the
thought that you are fighting is 100 percent absolutely positively true, the
white queen disappears. These polarities can’t stop. They don’t know how
to stop fighting with each other. From the point of view of each side of
the polarity, I better fight because my life is on the line. If a tiger came
in here and slowly ate you one gulp at a time, my guess is you’d have a
hard time just being absolutely calm about that. Because we’re tapping
into some very primitive programming that goes back to an earthworm
level of existence. So where I go with all that is, if you are those thoughts,
you can’t stop being in the war that’s in your head. At that level you have
too much invested in it. We spent a little bit of time sort of saying, can
you win the war? That’s what we did for a couple of sessions. But what
I’m saying right now is this: even though you can’t win it, you can’t stop
fighting if you believe you are these thoughts, these emotions.
C: Mm-hmm.
T: you just spent a couple of weeks saying that fighting only gets you deeper
into the quicksand; it doesn’t get you out. Yet you can’t stop. So, in this
metaphor, if you are not the pieces, who are you?
C: [Pause] Got me.
T: Within the metaphor. Who could you be? What could you be?
C: The hand.
T: yeah, the answer presents itself, except the hands are invested in winning
too. They’re the ones that manipulate the moves, manipulate the pieces.
They do this with the intent to box in the other team.
C: The table. I don’t know.
T: Suppose you really were more like the table?
C: If I were the table I could give a shit about what’s happening on top.
T: But you’re very much in contact with it. In fact more so than the pieces.
The table is the only thing in that whole image, the table meaning the
chessboard that is the table on which it’s played. You have a checkerboard
table—it’s the only thing in the metaphor that’s in contact with
everything.
C: All right, then. That’s not how I saw it in my mind, but then I choose not
to be the table [avoidance].
The client picks up on this aspect of what the therapist is saying. This is not a
problem. It is good to know where the client really is. If the client still experiences his
thoughts and feelings as real and dangerous, then more defusion work needs to be done.
T: Because?
C: Because optimally I want to disassociate myself completely from those silly
little pieces. I want to do something else [avoidance].
T: yeah. And that is what you’ve been doing, yes?
C: I try to do that.
T: Consider the possibility that doing that comes out of a place in which
you’ve been relating to pieces from the other team. They’re your enemies,
right? But who knows these reactions? Are they the table’s enemies?
Say this is a chessboard [picks up a magazine and puts it on the floor].
Suppose I put something really gross in here, like this [blows his nose into
a tissue and puts in on the magazine]. My guess is that the table finds it
as easy to hold that snotty rag as this pen [puts the pen on the magazine].
C: I’m lost.
T: It can hold what’s put on it, and the whole thing can move. The one
thing it doesn’t get to do is suddenly come out from who it is to start
moving these things around. Suppose it’s something like that? Now you
get to hold all your experiences, and you get to move in a direction. You
get to make choices, you can go places, you can do stuff. And you have
your experiences to experience. But you don’t get to put that traumatic
memory of yours back here or take that one off the board without going
from who you are to who you aren’t. And up here the war is important.
C: They’re always going to be there, and somehow you’ve got to learn to hold
them in a way that doesn’t burn your hands [avoidance].
T: Follow out that metaphor. The white pieces can’t hold the black pieces.
C: And vice versa.
T: And vice versa. Exactly. Now, that’s important. Good thoughts—so-
called—lead you into this polarity as easily as bad thoughts. And haven’t
you experienced that? “I’m good” can lead to fighting just as much as
“I’m bad.” From either side, the other side is life threatening, dangerous,
incomprehensible, undesirable, scary. Normally, we don’t think about
how to get rid of good thoughts, but actually, you don’t know how to 100
percent eliminate those either.
C: Exactly.
T: Enough blah, blah, blah; this is all just a metaphor after all. I’m not trying
to make a logical argument. I’m just trying to create a useful picture. But
I’d like to do something a little more experiential. It’s an eyes-closed kind
of deal. How willing are you to do an eyes-closed exercise?
C: Sure.
T: And what I’d like to do is to take this metaphor out into the world of
experience and just see what it’s like out there. I might periodically ask
you something and I’d ask you to respond or I might not. So you don’t
need to tell me what’s happening, although you can if it seems real
important for me to know some bit, but in general you don’t need to.
Just follow my voice. I’m not hypnotizing you. I’m not trying to relax you.
We’re just trying to go and get some raw data. And then we’ll come back
and talk about it.
C: Okay. I’m ready.
T: Thoughts?
C: I didn’t like it.
T: Okay. Do you know what it was associated with when you didn’t like it?
C: I was bored. I felt like you were trying to persuade me with something.
You were trying really hard, and I already got it and I thought, “We can
stop this now” [not present, fusion].
T: Hmmm …
C: That’s what I thought. It was like, what’s the point? Yes, there is a “me”;
there is something there behind all these things.
T: The part of you that just said that, is that the part of you that is aware of
what’s going on?
C: [Pause] No.
T: So, cool. Okay, so we make a connection, and then your mind comes in
and says, “Okay, I got it.” Sort of evaluates it, puts it in words. And then
the same mind says “Let’s get on to something else; enough already.”
Right? And that’s fine. Still, as it’s doing that, is there a part of you that
is just aware of that? Is there more to you than evaluation?
C: Okay, so, now I want to know, is there something about that exercise that
I can use? [conceptualized self, fusion, avoidance]
T: It depends on what you’re going to try to do with it. You said earlier, a
couple times, that there are certain kinds of things that you don’t have
much room for. You said something like, “I’m dang sure I don’t want those
things.” I’ve used the metaphor of a chessboard holding all of it. The
board-level part of you holds your bad memories as easily as your good
memories. But at the piece level, that’s a whole different thing. That’s a
war zone. And the war can’t stop. It doesn’t know how to stop. And as
you just said, your immediate reaction was something like “I don’t want
that.” So part of what I would ask you is, is it really true that you don’t
want that? Or is it that your mind doesn’t want that. Can you connect
with that part of you that stands back behind this persona, that part of
you really committed to not having whatever you have?
C: When you first introduced it as a concept, which is not a new concept,
a zillion thoughts went through my mind. What is that separate entity,
that “me,” what is that thing, you know? And is it something that can be
shaped or improved, or is it just meant to be there with all of the things
that happen around that core: the physical things, the thoughts, all that
kind of stuff? [conceptualized self] If those are just occurrences to that
central core, then who’s calling the shots? If you as a person are wanting,
you’re striving and educating and whatever, if those concepts don’t mean
anything to that central entity, then the whole thing falls apart, and
I’m just itching to know what you’re trying to get at [avoidance; scored
this way because we are guessing that the client is still trying to link the
issue to a control agenda]. If the whole purpose of trying to focus on this
center, this “you” that’s there through experiences and everything else,
and this is separate even from your body, but it’s not—I mean it is and
it isn’t—then what the hell are we talking about? What can I gain out
of this in terms of why I’m here talking to you? I mean is it supposed to
make me feel better in some way to know that I’m still going to be there
through thick and thin. Well, yeah, right.
T: The purpose isn’t to make you feel better. The purpose I had was to
see what is so. If at this deepest level, you haven’t been fundamentally
changed in terms of your basic core humanity, through all of what you’ve
been through, how likely is it that you’re going to be fundamentally
changed through the next thirty years?
C: Define fundamentally changed [fusion].
T: Well, I can only do it experientially. When you go back and you find that
strand of awareness. You find the teenager who was behind those eyes.
You find the child before that.
C: That’s you; that’s an awareness.
T: That’s right. And I’m not saying that this is everything that’s important
about people. I don’t mean that at all.
C: Okay.
T: Here’s what I’m doing: You don’t know how to win this war, and it’s not
comfortable to live inside a war zone. And I’m guessing that’s part of why
you’re here. I’m asking you to look and see if there’s a part of you that’s
not in the war zone, even though it’s 100 percent aware of the war. There
is a place from which to stand and do something other than win the
war. Will that mean that the war stops? I don’t think so. And who said
it had to stop? The part that’s troublesome about the war business is that
usually we have the idea that we’re going to win the war and then life will
start. Have you ever caught yourself sort of thinking, “My life will start
sometime later”?
C: For sure. All the time.
T: Well, suppose this is it. This is your life. It’s already started. The question
is, are you going to live in it? Well, you need a place from which to live
if you can’t do it by first winning the war and then living. Once you’re
up on that “piece” level, you cannot stop fighting. It’s not only that the
war goes on, which it will, but that your personal success and failure is
invested in it. Is it not? So it’s not only going on, your in the middle of it.
And you’ve got really important things at stake.
C: Mm-hmm.
T: How are you going to mask this? Is there any way that you could
have peace of mind living inside a war in which you have tremendous
investment in how it turns out? I mean, you’ve got to track it and watch
it, tend to it, work angles, you know? What else do you expect of yourself?
Of course you’re going to do that. This is the computer thing. Of course,
you’re going to try to reprogram it. If your mind is telling you that you’re
horrible or life’s horrible, or whatever, you’re going to be tapping on
those keys. There isn’t anything else that you can do. So I’m just trying
to find a place from which it’s possible to do something different. The
chess game just goes on and on and on. I don’t know. You tell me—what
it’s like inside your head? This is not a belief system; I’m not trying to
persuade you in a sense that you need to think a certain thing. Not at all.
Absolutely not at all. You’ve got a strong mind, though, whew. It’s almost
like your mind is like a mental bully or something. Not of me, I don’t
mean that. I just mean I can sort of feel its bite. It’s probably part of what
scares you when it gets on someone else; it almost doesn’t know when to
stop. Right?
C: yeah.
T: It’s like you could literally tear the person’s head off. But there’s also a
person in this room. Is there not?
C: It’s interesting to think about that. I guess I feel to some extent that my
T: yeah.
C: But I don’t really know what I’m saying even when I say that [defusion].
T: Cool. Good [pause]. We have to talk very metaphorically because your
mind is listening and it will turn it all around into words. Part of what
we’re trying to talk about is beyond words. So we have to make some
room for that sense of confusion. There’s one other thing you said that
created a dangling end for me. I wanted to put a point on it [pulls
magazine with tissue and pen forward again]. This is the chessboard; this
is a piece. That’s one thing. Here’s another thing [slides the magazine
across the floor with the pen and tissue coming along for the ride]. Come
on everybody, here we go. So I’m not just talking about navel watching or
sitting around and chatting or something.
C: I didn’t get that at all before. You can take the chessboard and move it.
T: yeah. Good. Let’s just let that rumble around. It’s responsive to something
you said earlier that you were disturbed about. Sooner or later we’ll tie the
loose ends up. Are there any other dangling ends that you feel need to be
tied just from what we’ve done?
C: No. I’ll probably think of stuff later.
