Session One
T: Okay. So, we’ve actually only met that one time. Have you been thinking
about coming in here and seeing a shrink yet again? I mean, what’s going
on in your head about getting back into therapy?
C: Well, a couple of thoughts crossed my mind. One was that you weren’t
really able to describe in detail the type of therapy you will be using. I
understand its purpose is to get out of the war instead of winning it—but
I don’t really know how you propose to do that. I thought that was very
interesting because I’ve always believed that if you can’t tell other people
what it is that you do, or why you do it, then you don’t really understand
it yourself. I agree to go ahead, and I guess I understand it, but it makes
me a bit worried, which I don’t really like [fusion, avoidance].
T: Okay, yeah, that’s some complex stuff. Can I make a distinction between
two different kinds of talk that may help? One kind of talk is about
describing something. The other kind of talk is to make a difference.
And sometimes the one isn’t the best avenue to the other. It’s like the
difference between a reporter and a coach. A coach can say any dang
thing and be literally false. You know, like, “Float down the field,” but
you don’t actually float. As long as the words do what they’re supposed to
do, well, then that’s cool. That’s what it’s about. On the other hand, the
reporter has to describe things accurately or he’s not going to have a job
very long. So in here, I want us to talk to make a difference. Do you play
any kind of sports or music?
C: I ski.
T: Okay, have you ever been in a situation where an instructor talks too much?
C: yeah.
T: And the next thing you know, you’re thinking too much?
C: For sure.
T: The next thing you know, it’s like, “Where do my feet go?”
C: Mm-hmm.
T: And you feel awkward and stupid. If I lay out some sort of big logical
scheme right now, it could just be a big obstacle. One of the things I
want in here is the freedom to be inconsistent, in a way, and to talk in
whatever ways will help you accomplish what it is that you really want to
accomplish by coming in here. Even if they’re contradictory, paradoxical,
confusing, as long as they get the job done. Then with another hat on,
we could maybe talk logically about what we are doing—when it’s safe to
do so. But the progress comes first—then the understanding. Otherwise
we will get all entangled in theory and take our eye off what we are really
trying to do.
C: you are expressing yourself well, and you are talking about things with
which I am not yet familiar. I’m willing to go on faith for a while here,
even if it’s a bit uncomfortable [acceptance].

T: The other thing I’d like to do is carve out a time to do this work, small
or large, without necessarily stopping to evaluate it at every step. You
can set it to fit your comfort level. Then at that time, we’ll sort of stop
and look and see how things are going, and you can tell me (I won’t tell
you) whether we are moving ahead. Therapy can be kind of like cleaning
out a glass that has sludge in the bottom —it’s probably going to make
everything look dirty for a period of time. You could very carefully pour
out the water and pour some more in and it would look cleaner, but
there’s still the sludge in the bottom. It’s like that. Sometimes people feel
confused, like things are going backward. On the one hand, I want to
make sure that you have control, in the sense that this is your therapy
and you’re not just buying something blind from some wiseass shrink. On
the other hand, we want to make sure that we have the time to sort of
get through some peaks and valleys.

T: It sounds like, in terms of general things that you’ve struggled with,
depression has been a constant going back to adolescence, right? And
anxiety, especially social anxiety and occasional feelings of panic. And
then there’s this anger issue. And I gather that is the additional kind of
struggle that brings you in.
C: yeah. I feel like I have proved to myself that I cannot control the
depression even though I keep trying. Anxiety comes and goes, but I
mostly just avoid it. I feel like the anger is something that I can control or
should be able to control, and I don’t understand it as well, and it bothers
me and interferes with my life [avoidance, conceptualized self].
T: Give me examples of some ways that anger interferes with your life; what’s the cost?
C: Cost … It derails me from whatever I want to be doing, whether it’s
working or what I am enjoying at any particular time.
T: Can you give me a couple of examples?
C: For example, being at work and having an employee do something or
I see the result of something that showed that this person was careless
or irresponsible or thoughtless or whatever, and instead of just going,
“Zowie, this person was careless or thoughtless or irresponsible,” I’m going,
“Goddamn it! Why was this person doing this?” It happens over and over.
You know, it’s inconceivable to me for them to be so irresponsible—and it
pisses me off and I resent that I have to live with it—that I can’t get away
from it, that I have to do something about it, that I have to take time
away from things that I feel are more important, or are more enjoyable,
to take care of this person’s problem [fusion]. When I’m able to get away
from work and I have time to reflect and think, this problem comes back
around again and again, and I think, “What am I going to do about this?”
Again, you know the resentment of why it’s taking up my time, here I
am on my leisure time, and it’s still taking up my time [not present; he is
giving us an example of how hard it is to stay present outside of session
instead of drifting off into his mind].
T: How about switching to the other issues? I’m going to ask you the same
thing. How about the depression and anxiety side: what is the cost?
C: The cost is similar. I spend too much energy trying to solve it, deal with
it, cure it, trying to turn it into something manageable by squashing it,
curing it, you know, whatever. It messes up my days off or causes me to
not go to work. When I have a day off, I just lie in bed; I can’t get up
[avoidance, fusion, unclear values]. When anxiety hits, I just withdraw.
T: yeah. And this kind of fix, cure, struggle, focus-on-a-plan, figure-it-out
stuff that goes on in the anger area—“Why did he do this?” or “What am
I going to do about this?”—is what’s going on in depression or anxiety,
essentially a form of that same kind of struggle?
C: yeah. The methods are the same.

T: yeah. And if you were to look over the last month, if anger can go from
0 (which is blissful absence of an anger moment) to 10 (in which you’re
ready to rip the heads off whoever walks by, or at least whoever pushes
your buttons)—where would you say you are?
C: Mostly 1s and 2s with some very disturbing, you know, 7s, 8s, and 9s right
in there. Depression is pretty much down most of the time—1s and 2s
and 3s. Anxiety has peaks.
T: So, in that 7–8–9 range, if we were to create another scale, which is how
much you struggle with that, how much you squash the anger, try to cure
it or figure it out and so on, where would you put that scale?


C: Well, as I sort of implied, I feel like I have the depression under control
most of the time. When that’s a factor, I fall back on medication, sleeping,
exercise. Sometimes it’s a struggle to do the exercise—I just don’t feel like
doing it [avoidance]. Sleeping is not usually a problem, unless I had too
much of something, which also isn’t usually the case, so that, on a scale,
I probably am a 4, 5 maybe, with depression. It’s maybe taking up half of
my effort [avoidance].
T: Okay.
C: But when the anger comes, there’s a lot more effort going into it because
of its destructiveness. There is the potential to harm my business, hurt
somebody else, get a big legal slap, hurt a customer in some way. You
know, they’ve come in for some food and relaxation, and I not only don’t
help them relax but I’m upsetting them because they see how angry I am
and I’m attacking my staff. There’s something wrong with me when I get
like that [fusion, avoidance, conceptualized self].

T: If you were to put a number on it, where would you say you tend to go,
strugglewise, when anger is rocking?
C: I try to match it, point to point [avoidance].
T: Okay. What have you tried on the anger stuff? I mean, when you’re in
the middle of the struggle with it, what are you trying, or what are you
thinking about? One of the things you’ve said so far is you try to talk
yourself out of it.

C: First of all, I back off, you know, step aside from this emotion. Give myself
a few minutes to think about what is really going on here. Usually it’s
a reaction to something that’s been perceived that will make someone
angry, a threat, an insult, a flaunting of rules. It takes the coolheaded
party to back off and say, “Zowie, you thought I blasted you right there,
and I can see that I—whatever I did—hit you the wrong way. I’m sorry,
maybe we need to, or we don’t need to go into what actually happened
but, what’s behind this, and usually it’s the same old thing: I want too
much or you don’t want me to do this or whatever.” I try to figure out
what’s going on, in other words [avoidance, fusion, conceptualized self].
T: Okay.
C: It’s real hard for me to look at someone and realize that they seem to
be happy just poking along, you know, just being there. They think
that showing up for work on time, well-groomed, is enough. Maybe by
the book that’s enough. I mean, these folks are following the contract,
but following the contract or not, I mean, “God dang, don’t you want
anything out of your life? If you’re coming to work at a job, that doesn’t
mean anything to you? Don’t you want to advance from here?” I’ve done
this. I’ve worked my way up the ladder and now I even own the place.
Now I can do things that are more valuable, worthwhile to others, and
worthwhile to me. They don’t, they don’t care. I don’t want to work with
these people. They’re not educated. They don’t care about using their
minds. They’re blind. They’re not ambitious. They’re not fun because
they don’t see fun like I see it. God, I don’t want to be with these people
there. It’s not that they have bad intentions or bad attitudes, they just
don’t have any. … I don’t know, so it pisses me off that I spend time with
these people. I want to spend time with people who care about what they
are doing [avoidance, fusion, not present, conceptualized self]. Of course I
can’t say that directly. I always have to patch it up. I need to or I wouldn’t
have anyone to staff the place. So when I go off, I have to stuff it and
backpedal … just to smooth things over [inflexible].

T: It seems very sticky. I can feel the pull of it even in these few moments
of talking about it. And it sounds like some of what you then do is to try
and just manage this situation and your reactions to it. I gather some of
those things work to a degree.
C: yes.
T: They manage the situation, short-term. What it doesn’t do is remove the
issue, yes? I mean, here you are, seeing me.


C: Right.
T: That feeling is going to come back again and again, and when it
comes back, it’s going to be awfully intense for you. Has that been your
experience?
C: Right. And the basic issue is that we have different values, different hopes
and expectations, and I can’t seem to put aside the fact that they’re doing
the best that they can or want to [avoidance, fusion, conceptualized self,
unclear values; it is worth noting that the language of values is being used
here, but it is different than the kinds of values we will pursue in ACT
because there is very dominantly this “I’m right; you’re wrong” quality,
and probably if it were a choice, the client would not choose to be about
that in his life].
T: Has this same issue shown up in other places, like close relationships and
things of that kind?
C: It came up in that other situation I was telling you about, about the
blonde in the convertible, just sort of waltzing through life.
T: yeah.
C: She cut me off! Like don’t you see that you just put two lives in
danger? And people who litter—it’s like, “Don’t you care?” We all
have to take some responsibility; we all have to care [not present,
fusion, conceptualized self; the reason self is scored here is that inside
the judgment of others there is an implicit entanglement with a
conceptualized self, as if to say, “And I’m not like that!”].

T: Okay. In personal relationships? We just went by this very quickly in
the last session, but you are going through a breakup with your current
girlfriend, yes?
C: yes.
T: And does anger show up there too?
C: yeah. It was kind of a similar thing. It could be related actually. I felt that
my partner wasn’t doing her part holding up her end of the stick. I felt
like I was making things happen, whether it was good stuff or bad stuff.
My interest was petering out because it didn’t seem like she was growing
or contributing [conceptualized self; again, these judgments of others
suggest attachment to a conceptualized self].
T: Okay. It does seem similar. Are there other things you do when you’re
angry or depressed? What kind of things have you done to deal with that
when it shows up?
C: Well, one time I tried to kill myself because it was just unbearable.
T: Okay.
C: I would do it again if it became unbearable [avoidance].
T: It’s always a way out.
C: For sure.
T: As far as we know, people don’t hurt when they’re dead [pause].

T: What else do you do when you’re angry or depressed?
C: Sleep. As I said, the depression kind of leads more toward the irritation
part, and other times it’s like, “I just can’t; I just can’t do anything.” As
time passes by, it’s like, “Zowie, I have enough energy now; I can get up
and fight”
T: Tell me a little bit about your own relationship with emotions more
generally—your emotional life. The sense I get is that if things are going
on emotionally that are unpleasant, a primary move for you would be to
go into your head: figuring it out, thinking about it, talking yourself out of
it.
C: If it’s negative, unpleasant, for sure [avoidance].
T: Right. If you look at negative emotionality in general, how much capacity
do you have to stay with it or to do other things with it, other than
the ones that you mentioned? I want you to tell me about your sort of
emotional life and how you are as an emotional person—kind of what your
model is, I guess; what you’re supposed to do with it. What’s it even for?


C: They help me figure out how I feel about what it is that I’m doing. If I’m
not happy about going to work, and it’s unhappy enough where I’m getting
physical sensations—you know, I feel sick to my stomach—then it tells me
that that wasn’t a good thing; maybe work isn’t where I ought to be right
now. Maybe I should look into changing something. But if I can’t, that’s
where I get into my head like, “I’ve got to put these feelings someplace
else because they’re interfering with my work, which is important right
now” [avoidance, conceptualized self]. I have to do it, to stay alive, you
know, to keep the roof over my head and my kids’ heads—at least when
they are with me.
T: Okay, so the first move is “I’m too busy to have time to do that, and
then I’ve got to do something else with that, just not have it interfere too
much.”
C: Right. But sometimes good feelings are to be enjoyed, I mean, to let
them wash over you and let them release tension for you. I was in a real
interesting situation not too long ago at a dinner party at a friend’s house.
There were about equal numbers of males and females, and we decided
we wanted to get a little crazy, you know. And we were playing with a
balloon that was there from one of the host’s kids—pretending that it
could not touch the table or ground without moving your chair. There
was only one woman who kind of played with us and said things like,
“One, two, three, go!” and we’d whack the balloon. I was just laughing
and the tears were coming down and we all, I think we all knew that,
God, it had been a long week, and here we are at this party, we’re just
going to cut loose, nobody was really getting smashed, getting drunk or
anything, we were just being really silly. Like little boys. And the women
were looking at us like we were goofy. We had a good time. It made me
wonder if they go out and have their own good time, but it wouldn’t
be like that I don’t think [conceptualized self; note how the person is
defining himself in a way that differentiates his experience from others,
particularly women]. You know, being physical at the table and just letting
your laughter come out. I mean I hadn’t anticipated that happening,
but I think that’s one of the reasons I go to parties anyway; I like to be
with people who are safe, that I can just say whatever I want to with,
and be appreciated for you know, being me [avoidance, conceptualized
self; both of these scores come because this comment implies that it is
not acceptable to be yourself with your own reactions in other contexts,
especially if others do not approve]. [Client begins to tear up.]
T: Okay. There’s something in the room having to do with …
C: My conditioning.
T: yeah. What stands between you and really living.
C: It’s very powerful.

T: Tell me about that. My sense is that this is an issue for you that sort of
lurks a level down or something. It’s old. Am I wrong about that?
C: I can see that, right there [pause]. I remember many occasions growing
up where my father, not my mother, would say, basically, stuff it, whatever
I was feeling. “Stop crying; save your tears for something important,”
and you know I could be completely wrong and he might have said
something else, but that’s what I heard. It’s like, well, wait a minute, if
this is important to me, now, then you’ve just invalidated everything I’ve
ever felt up until I’m an adult, and you’re telling me that nothing I feel is
worthwhile. I didn’t have those words when it was happening. I was just
angry. It was like, you’re telling me that what I’m feeling is not important,
or not valid or not right, or incorrect. And I internalized that [avoidance,
conceptualized self].
T: Right. Ouch.
C: So, I remember being pissed at him at the time but also realizing that my
crying made him uncomfortable. He wanted me to come and sit down to
dinner; he wanted everything to be okay, and I wanted to accommodate
him and that situation [avoidance]. Many other experiences like that
made me realize that I couldn’t go to him when I needed to spill my guts,
and there were many times that I knew that what I needed to spill my
guts about was stupid. You know, it’s like I’m being jealous or petty or
greedy or something, and yet, I just wanted him to say something. I know
he loves me very much, and we have a great time together, but I have
learned to not talk about emotional stuff at all. It hurt to not be able to
be myself with my parents [acceptance; it would be a better indicator of
clinical progress if he saw that he was not willing to be himself around
others, rather than not “able,” but this is a step].
T: Right.
C: And my mom is too much like me, you know, she’s in her head.
T: Right. So Dad is saying that, or giving the message that …
C: “This is scary, this makes me uncomfortable.” So I back off [avoidance].

T: If a miracle were to happen as a result of what we do in here, how would
things be different?
C: The thoughts that are running through my head are “Do I want to have
a means or a tool to be able to instantly make my negative thoughts go
away?” I’m not sure I do. Maybe to turn my negative thoughts around and
get something out of them

T: Part of you wants to say, “Go away,” but part of you is a little suspicious of
that and wonders what they have to teach you. Do I understand you?
C: yeah.
T: you mentioned negative thoughts; is this an issue for you as well? I mean
we’ve been talking about it in terms of the emotion side, but thoughts are
slightly different.
C: For sure.
T: The same ball of wax but a different side of it?
C: yes, and I think that thoughts are very powerful and I’ve tried to go from
not saying things, you know, like “Fuck you,” you know, and I don’t. I
avoid negativity [fusion].
T: yeah.
C: I wasn’t raised that way, or whatever, but I think that spitting out those
negative words makes that negativity more palpable, and so I try not to
think negative thoughts [avoidance, fusion]. Like “God, I hate you” or
whatever. I say to myself, “I don’t like this; okay, I’m going to do it and
get it over with.” Anything from going to the dentist, to, like I’m on the
computer and I swear to God, my fingers are betraying me, you know, I’m
trying to get something and I can’t get the damn typing right.
T: Huh.
C: So, no negativity, just, just let it go, okay. Boy, this is really pissing me
off, all right, things aren’t going well, you know, let it go, let it go, just try
to let it go [avoidance; in this case the words “Let it go” mean “Make it
stop.” It is not acceptance].
T: Okay. How does that work?
C: It helps.
T: Okay. Do you have an example?
C: For example, I also do things like, “Boy, you are so stupid; how could you
have done that?” and then I turn it into, “Okay, yeah, I made a mistake,
you know, but I’m still okay.” So I try to turn it into positive tapes instead
of negative tapes about me [avoidance, fusion, conceptualized self].
T: Okay.
C: Because when I get depressed it’s like, I hate me [pause]. I hate everyone
T: Right. Nice. Very nice. … But then even that, the whole thing of talking
your way out of self-criticism. In the long run, take a look. Even that
doesn’t work, yes?
C: [Pause] It doesn’t. It all just seems to take me down further and further.

T: I’m back to the miracle question. At best, if a miracle were to happen,
what would happen as a result of what we do here?
C: I would be happy and less angry and depressed than I am [avoidance].
T: Okay. The bottom line is that you’ll know that you’re doing well when
there’s less anger, less depression, and more happiness.
C: yes. And I’m afraid that you’re going to tell me that’s not the way it
works [present; this score is a judgment call, but it seems that the client is
catching his reaction in flight].

T: I don’t know if I’d tell you that, but I’d ask you to look at something. I’d
ask you to look at your own experience and not what some shrink would
tell you. If we take these things and say, “Okay, now which would you
prefer, depression or happiness?” this is an easy choice. Which would
you prefer, putting your finger in the wall socket or having a nice meal?
I’m not saying that we live in a world in which “happy” is not preferred
over “angry and depressed.” But here’s the part that’s tricky: suppose you
have that as a goal and then find that moving toward it—those things of
“more happy,” “less anger,” and “less depressed”—suppose you find that it
loops back on itself in such a way that it actually made it quite unlikely,
much less likely, that life could assume a level of happiness, anger, and
depression that was appropriate to where you really were? You were
talking a few moments ago about your sense that maybe these negative
emotions and thoughts sometimes give you an important message. Right?
Sometimes things are really happening in your life, you know, like a
relationship is going into the dumpster, or one of your kids gets sick.
“Happy” is probably not the right emotion to tell you that. Emotions can
be useful as sort of a guide—at least they tell you about what from the
past is now in the present. But if you get too attached to “less angry,”
“less depression,” “more happy,” then you’ve got these emotions less as
a guide and you’ve also got “Maybe I can do some things to ‘feel better’
right now” … even if that is not helpful.

C: you said something about the goal, you know, if this goal moves back on
itself. Are you implying that then there is something wrong, that the goal
is not appropriate, that the goal is not a good goal, or that the process of
getting to the goal isn’t working or isn’t likely to work? [fusion]
T: Well, there’s a paradox. When you’re actually in pursuit of the goal, most
anybody can recognize that “Oh, yeah, this is better than that.” Happy is
better than angry, right? And yet, the paradox may be that if you hold it
as a goal, it can’t work as a goal. You said you ski. If you get afraid on a
steep hill, what do you want to do?
C: Oh yeah, you want to lean back.
T: Lean back, right? And then what happens?
C: you fall down.
T: yeah. You’re in deep doo-doo if you lean back, because you take weight
off the front of your skis and there’s no control. So in the name of
getting control, making it safer, you don’t have any. Suppose it’s like that?
Suppose this kind of natural, logical, reasonable, sensible, human thing
has a strange loop in it. As you go out after these things, they slip away
and somehow it never quite gets handled. Some times are better than
other times, and some things seem to work better than others—we’ve
explored lots of those in here. But you know—here you are, seeing a
shrink, again.
C: I’m aware of this theory that happiness is in the journey and the going
and the doing, and it’s true, you know. I’m happy when I’m producing
and working on getting things done, and then I get it done and then it’s
like, well, there’s always something else to do, you know. So I can see that
kind of problem. You said something last time that was real intriguing to
me because I felt like this has always been a problem, my thinking about
things in terms of yes or no, black or white, have or have not. I think
if I get rid of my depression, what’s going to fill its spot is happiness. I
know that isn’t necessarily the case, but it is what I find myself thinking
[defusion]. So maybe not happiness, like not anything would be fine and
better than this [avoidance]. I mean, I would be very happy to just be
kind of a blob. I don’t think I’m manic-depressive, but the manic stuff
shakes you out as much as being depressed. Being depressed is awful and
you can’t stand it, but being manic can be intolerable as well [fusion]. So,
I would like to not be so angry, but it’s not that I’m necessarily looking for
more happiness to take its place. It’s like I just want to stop it because it
hurts [avoidance].
T: Right, right.
C: Both the anger and the depression are painful.
T: Okay. Well, here’s what I want to put on the table; you know, we’ve got
more work to do to kind of work this out, this is our first kind of real
session together, but, let us put a couple of things on the table. Isn’t it
suspicious that as much effort as you put into this issue, here you are
again talking to a shrink? Don’t you think that’s suspicious? After all this
effort?
C: Something’s not working. So I keep looking for somebody who can kick
me in the butt and say, you’re missing this. You’re missing a point, or
something. I’m hoping that somebody has got some more insight than I do
[avoidance, conceptualized self].
T: Okay, and the way you know they have more insight is there would
be—ideally, you’d be happier, less angry, and less depressed, right?
C: yeah, but happy and insight don’t go hand in hand.
T: yeah, but I mean the kind you are seeking. If it was insight that really
made a difference and wasn’t just blah, blah, blah.
C: Right, okay, some magic move, the silver bullet, the missing piece
[avoidance, fusion].
T: Right, the missing piece. Wherever they got the missing piece, it should
make a result, and the result is going to be this result. Right? Happier, less
angry, and less depressed.
C: I guess the real miracle I want is to be able to understand why I’m
feeling what I’m feeling at any particular time and to be able to control it


T: yeah, exactly. Precisely. Now here’s the thing that I want to put on the
table. Suppose that this is part of the problem. Suppose that actually is
the sticking point?
C: The controlling? Wanting to control?
T: That I want to be able to understand it so that I can control it. I mean,
you’ve reduced it down now to a real core, which I think is a great
move. It’s really helpful. Beautiful. Elegant. “This is what I want.” And
it’s a natural human thing to want that. And yet, look at the results it’s
produced. Consider the possibility that we’re in the situation in which all
the logical, reasonable, rational, normal things that you know to do tend
not to fundamentally remove the issues that you’re applying these things
to. Your experience actually tells you something like this because you’ve
spent a lot of effort on it, and it’s still hanging around. Whereas if you
spent that much effort on almost anything outside the skin, I mean it
would have been handled long since. Right?
C: But I have; I’ve done some good things.
T: And maybe that thought kept you going. It would be like somebody
falling over a cliff in total darkness who grabbed a branch. The good
that’s done is “At least I didn’t fall to my death.” You are stuck on the
cliff but you are alive. It turns out, however, if you were to let go, it’s only
a few feet down anyway and then you’d be free to move around. And so,
yeah, “I’ve saved myself” but at the cost of being stuck. Maybe even the
good that’s been done has a cost to it.
C: Mm-hmm.
T: The cost that you’ve actually experienced is that the issue hasn’t
disappeared. It’s still here intensely enough that you want to be in therapy
again. What you’ve done is logical. But here we are.
C: So, what you’re telling me is you have something else to offer in its
place? Instead of rationality and concentration and analysis, you’ve got
something else that you want me to try? What is it? I’ll give it a try!

T: Consider the possibility that your change agenda is part of the problem.
Your mind is in there saying, “Okay, now what is it that’s the solution?
Give me something new to fix this problem.” But your mind’s hooked
up to a formulation that says, “The solution goes over here,” right? So if
that’s the way your mind is set up, anything I would say would fall into
that same system. Your mind would say, “Okay, so would that work for my
problem?” Well, what do you mean “work”? Work to do what?
And if that’s the issue, then we’ve got to be very tricky. We’ve got
to be sneaky in here because we’ve got four people in the room—you,
me, your mind, and mine. Your mind believes it has figured out what this
whole thing is about and what needs to happen during these sessions. It’s
well-defined to your mind. If that very agenda is part of the problem, then
your mind is going to take everything that I say and loop it back around
into your change agenda—even things you say—and loop everything back
around and try to fit it into that structure.
So part of what we need to do is see whether or not that structure
has actually paid off. See if your situation is sort of like this: Life
blindfolds you, gives you a bag to carry, and supposedly there are tools in
it. It puts you out in the middle of the field and tells you to live your life,
and living your life consists of running around. And somewhere—age
thirteen, fourteen, whatever—you find yourself having fallen in a hole.
And so you feel around and you try to find a way out, and there isn’t a
clear way out. And so you do what you know how to do: You wait and
nothing happens. You call out for help; nothing happens. You finally
reach inside the bag, and there’s a shovel in there. And so you start
digging to see if you can control or get out of the situation you’re in. Deal
with it; get out of the situation you’re in. Except as you dig, it seems as
though this hole is getting bigger; it’s getting more central. And so you
dig some more, and it gets more central. Maybe this situation is more like
that. You come in here with a structure of the situation you’re in that
suggests kind of where you need to go, and yet, part of what we need to
do is first face facts. Maybe that structure is part of the problem. Are you
with me? Does it connect at all with how things have seemed for you?
C: yeah. But I’m pretty entrenched in this way of thinking and I want
to imagine other ways. I want to think of another way. I just can’t
[avoidance, fusion].
T: Interesting thought. Thanks Mr. Mind! But suppose that organ between
your ears is trying to do its logical, reasonable, rational thing as best it
knows how. So it’s telling you various solutions. If you try the various
solutions, then if that doesn’t work, try something else. And then you
eventually come in here, essentially asking me to help dig you out. Maybe
I’ve got a shovel, a better shovel, a bigger shovel, a steam shovel, a gold-
plated shovel. But in that situation, digging may not be what is necessary.
In fact, it actually, paradoxically, sort of cements some things in place.
What if it is like that? Bottom line, here we are, still on this issue of
feelings that that have been hanging around for years upon years. Yes? I’m
not being judgmental in saying that, I’m asking you just to look.
C: I’ve been doing it wrong all this time?

T: you’ve been doing it wrong? I’m not saying that. In fact, I’m saying the
opposite. You’ve been doing the rational, logical, reasonable things that
people do. I mean you’re doing it quite well, in fact, really quite well. And
yet, it doesn’t seem to have done the trick. And maybe that is because
the whole thing is a setup. It’s just a mind trick, that maybe this isn’t a
digging situation—maybe it’s another kind of situation.
C: Well, there’re lots of answers I think to what the other situation could be.
And there’s the one that, you know, hey, we are human beings and we are
hardwired, or softwired, into being this kind of creature. Thinking—this
is our curse. We’re unhappy. Because we can think. And yet I don’t think
that’s going to stop [acceptance, defusion].

C: The other thing is, if you can do this, I mean, if you’ve done it. I’m
guessing that you know something because you are offering to help.
T: Hmmm.
C: That you have found a different way to be, or see different ways to be.
Maybe it’s something that you’re practicing. And again this something,
whatever it is, I don’t understand. If you were able to find a way out of
this problem, then I should be able to also. So I have this double way of
thinking, “Goddamn it, why can’t I do it?”—whatever “it” is [fusion].
T: Right.
C: And also, you know [pause], why can’t you just show me right now? Why
can’t you tell me? [avoidance]
T: Right, right. Nice.
C: you know, why are you being over there smug in your chair?
T: Do I seem smug?
C: No, you don’t.
T: yeah.
C: I don’t know. So my mind is kind of, right now, ah. … Whew. I’m
confused now [defusion, present].

T: yeah, cool. Good. Very nice.

C: And I’m also wondering, can I? I mean if it’s a question of letting go,
the letting go is scary to me. Can I let go and do or be or see or hear
whatever? [defusion, acceptance]
T: yeah. Good. This is cool. This is cool. Yeah, this thing, you know, it really
is like there are four people in the room. And I can see you see some of
what’s been happening here. But your mind is sort of going, “Hey, wait
a minute! I don’t quite understand what’s going on here!” and it tries to
formulate it back into logic because it’s your servant and it’s trying to
actually be helpful. But it doesn’t know how to be helpful to you in this
area. Your own life is surely proof of that. It turns out your mind is really
not your friend here. It’s not your enemy either, but it’s definitely not your
friend. It tells you that its methods are the only way that you know how
to do anything. But its not so—your own experience has been whispering
that at you for years. There is more to you than your mind.
C: It’s like using the wrong tool, like picking up a hammer and wanting to
turn the Phillips head with it [defusion; this can be scored as defusion
because we have shifted from the literal truth of thoughts to their
functional utility].
T: Awesome. Yeah, it’s kind of like that. Neat.

T: you know when you go into a library, there are stone lions at the
entrance, right?
C: New York Public.
T: Exactly, big libraries.
C: yeah.
T: They have long stone stairways and lions. It goes back to the Greeks or
even earlier. The more important the temple, the longer the stairs—sort
of a physical metaphor. There is a hard path to enlightenment, but up
there you can see a long way. And there are these lions at the bottom
of the stairs. The Greeks actually named them. The one on the left
was called Paradox and the other one was called Confusion. Part of the
structure that is holding you back is very logical, reasonable, rational, and
sensible. Minds are really great for dealing with lots of things, but there
are some things they’re not so great for. And facing that is scary. Do I
have some special solution or some inside knowledge or something? I’m
not saying that. I’ve worked with a lot of clients, and I personally intend
to stay with what works. I’m not just meaning to flap my gums. But still,
bottom line, the only thing that matters in here is your experience—
yours. It’s the only thing that matters. Yet another rap from yet another
therapist is not what you need. Is it?
C: No.
T: I mean, I’ll be glad to lay one on you if you want one. But I’m with you.
Blah, blah, blah won’t do it. But your experience tells you something. Take
a hard look at your experience and see if it’s not closer to that person who
fell in a hole. There’s something kind of funny about how these issues
have hung around despite all of your effort. Maybe it’s because something
else is called for here. Maybe this is a gigantic trick. Like, you don’t get
out of holes by digging. You create them by digging. You get out of holes
with ladders, or something like that.
C: Some people try some very interesting things to get out of holes in all the
various areas, like Scientology.
T: Exactly right. There you go.
C: It’s amazing how people can get themselves even deeper. I’m very
mistrustful of head shrinking and religion.
T: yeah.
C: And that’s because I see people getting into deeper holes or losing
themselves completely; I mean, the dirt is over the top [avoidance,
conceptualized self; this can be scored on self because the client is in
essence saying, “Some people lose themselves, and I am not like that”].

T: Right on. So to be real clear, I’m only asking you to look at your
experience and to stay with what works for you. I kind of want to look
at some stuff and have you look at some things, but this is not El Guru
coming down with some holy books or something.
C: Well, shit, what am I paying my money for then? [defusion; this is slightly
defused because it pokes gentle fun at wanting to understand everything
and have an absolutely correct answer]
T: I don’t know, but not that.
C: Okay, well.

T: Well, I’d like you to do two things. In this next week I’d like to see
if you’d be willing to stay with a kind of honest look at the stuckness
around this issue. And just consider the possibility that you actually have
gotten your hands firmly on that shovel, and really what we need to do
first is find a way to let go of that—not at first knowing what else to do.
Because it’s kind of a faith deal, but not faith in what is coming next—
faith that comes out of pain. The moves we need to make come out of
“I’m fed up” and “I don’t know what to do, so what the hell” or just “I’ve
had enough.” It isn’t something where you can kind of rationally know
what the alternatives are and weigh them first. It’s more like “I don’t
know what else to do but I do know this digging thing, fundamentally,
this isn’t solving it.” That’s important. I mean pain is our real ally here.
Let’s at least do no more of what has ultimately not worked in the past.
So, what I’m asking you to do is watch what happens when depression
or anger come up, and watch how you want to get your hands on it, you
know, watch how you get your hands on a shovel, and see if you can just
notice that. Consider the possibility that part of what we need to do is get
our hands off it, not at this point knowing what the alternative would be.
Not what your mind tells you—your mind will always tell you, “A little
more of this, a little different that, a little better that.” It’s going to try to
figure it out logically, but it’s the organ that put your hands on that shovel
in the first place.
C: Okay.
T: So I don’t want you to try to argue with yourself, or anything; just kind of
watch it. I don’t want you to do anything different. I just want you to just
sort of notice how this game plays out. I’m also going to give you a couple
of things to take home that are sort of questionnaires and stuff to fill out,
but they are just short ones, which I ask you to bring in when you come
in [at this point the Willingness Diary is given to him; see Hayes et al.,
1999, pp. 142–144]. The main one is this: I’d like you to rate each night
the amount of depression and anger you’ve experienced that day, on a 1
to 10 scale.
C: Okay.
T: And two more things: the amount of struggle or effort to change those
emotions through the day, also 1 to 10. And finally, workability: if every
day were like that day, how workable overall would your life be? Can you
do that? Don’t change anything. Just watch. Be mindful. Be honest.
C: Will do.
