T: How are you doing?
C: I’m doing fair to shitty, you know? It feels like my emotions are all over
the place. I had a medication change, which I think is part of it.
T: Oh, really? Before you go, we’ll get that written down, just to keep track.
C: I sometimes feel like a basket case for no reason. I am having really bad
headaches—they feel like migraines. My joints and nerves feel like I have
a real low-grade fever. You know how you have body aches when you’re
sick? It feels like that just a little bit. So, basically, that is a pain, and
I’m waiting for it to stop. I also have something going on with one of my
feet; it hurts. I might have hurt it while hiking with my kids. I need to
walk and I need to hike and when I can’t, I’m a hurting puppy. I’m also
thinking, “What the hell am I doing, coming and spending time with this
person?” and, it’s like, what’s this, the fifth session I think?
T: I think fourth, other than the intake session. What did we carve out—ten?
C: yeah, sort of a preliminary-type thing.
T: So at ten we’ll stop and look again.
C: So what do you think about what we’re doing and how we’re doing it?
T: I think you’re very slippery. You’ve got a very strong mind that beats you
up. It’s pretty quick. We’re going to have to figure out a way to work
around it. It’s not trying to hurt you; it’s actually trying to help, but we’ve
got to find a way to not have it completely dominate. Where are you?
C: Just hanging on. I’m trying not to think about anything too much. I try
to think about what we’ve talked about and, you know, bounce it off my
mind and see if anything else lights up on the pinball machine. I tend to
see things as yes or no, black or white, all or nothing. I know I want for
things to be that way because it’s easy to peg things. It’s more comfortable
to know where you stand all the time. And intellectually I know that
nothing is that way, but I guess that’s another struggle that’s going on in
me all the time. Life is always a struggle, and sometimes you kind of just
want to lay it aside, smell the roses, which can be fun, too. I mean, I can
do that. But I was raised to keep working. Keep pushing. So, I’m sort of
pissed at the circumstances that I find myself in [fusion, avoidance].
T: How would you describe those circumstances in a sentence?
C: Being driven, I guess, but if I wasn’t, where would I be? Working in the
place I own, I guess. I wouldn’t know what to do with myself. But I like
driving myself because I like results. I like learning and I know that
there’s way more out there than I’ll ever be able to get my fingers on. It’s
hard to let up even though it’s tiring.
T: Is there anything bouncing off what we were working on last time?
C: Well, a couple of things. You said there’s somebody there. There’s a “you”
there that’s been there all this time. I’m real intrigued by who that “you”
is and what kind of capabilities that “you” has. I can catch it for moments.
Could it be working for me to help me feel better? But I don’t think
so. It seems like a neutral “you” that just is there [self as context]. You
said, “You don’t have to believe what I’m telling you,” but there’s either
believing, an intellectual understanding, or suspension of belief, where
you’re playing. Let’s pick one [fusion].
T: Let’s look at that just a little bit, just kind of some intellectual play.
Which is risky business with a quick-minded person like you, but let’s do
it anyway. Language is a funny business. It has some funny effects. Try
this out: try to describe something in which what you describe is 100
percent in the moment—in the present.
C: you can’t. Your nose is there on your face, but it’s changed already in the
amount of time that I’m describing it.
T: Okay, now, as you look at things, at the instant that you see them, is your
experience of seeing them in the present?
C: [Pause] Yes, but only for a nanosecond.
T: yeah. But it’s there, right? The instant that you see them is in the present.
Right?
C: Right.
T: So you experience things in the present, right? Not in the past or the
future. But if you say something, the thing you’re talking about is always
somewhere else, sometime else. The “now” that you’re talking about is
about this much behind the “now” that you said it. So here’s the problem:
Imagine that we’ve got a continuum like this, and over here is belief
and over here is disbelief. Now imagine that there’s another continuum
that rides this way. And it goes from “in the present” to “out of the
present”—in quotes. It’s in quotes because we can’t actually get out of
the present. But you know, when you go off in your mind and you’re
thinking about stuff, what you’re going to do next Tuesday, or what
your mother did when you were five, it’s like, of course, you’re alive that
moment, but what you’re thinking about is not in the moment. You’re
off into the verbal past and the verbal future. [If engaged in this type
of verbal activity, the client is likely not present with what is occurring
in life—he is in his mind. Discussion of “right” and “wrong” or “belief”
and “disbelief” automatically takes the person out of the present. Being
present involves detaching from that content and being aware of the
process of thinking. See figure 5.1 for a visual description of this concept.]
C: Right.
T: Here’s the continuum, and here’s another continuum. Suppose in order to
get over here—which is here and now, present—you have to step off, kind
of slide off that continuum altogether. We could be over here saying, “I
don’t believe that,” or over here saying, “I do,” but both of them have this
same characteristic, which is a belief and disbelief that’s entirely a verbal
event. No “now” there at all.
C: How is this going to help me?
T: Help you do what?
C: Feel good.
T: [Pause] Let’s look at that phrase, “feel good.” “Feel good” has two
things in it: “feel” and then an evaluation, right? And the way that we
would normally do it, we want to feel good, with the emphasis on the
evaluation—the word “good.” We want to feel good again. The problem
is, the ability to evaluate pretty much also means you don’t want to feel
bad things. The problem with that is, there are lots of things to feel that
are bad. There are bad memories, bad bodily sensations. Here your body
is sort of doing various things for you this morning and mostly you are
calling them “not good.” So, if you’re going to feel, you’re going to feel
both good and bad. Where I’m going with that is, the part of you that
can step off the continuum may indeed help you feel good, but it won’t be
feel good; it will be something more like, feel good.
C: [Pause] Okay.
T: Do a good job of feeling—which is different than feeling only the feelings
that your mind tells you are good. Which is kind of a harsh place to put
yourself. If you can only feel the ones that are good, how do you know
what’s around the corner? I mean, you might get into this feeling-emotion
area, and the next thing you know, you might be feeling something bad.
This is not safe. So if you can only allow yourself to feel good, you can’t
afford to feel at all. Are you with me?
C: Mm-hmm.
T: So, I think, yeah, I can help you feel good. I can help you feel … good.
We’re not quite to the part we need to do this, but just as a game in
here for the next few times, would you be willing to watch for feelings,
thoughts, evaluations, and if we can catch them, say what they are, like
“I feel this. I think this. I evaluate it this way.” Because what language
does, it will take those things and put them in the objects and then
forget to tell you that it did that. “Feel good” is an example. There’s an
evaluation in there. But it looks as if you’re just feeling something; you’re
not evaluating anything—as if the evaluation is in the event evaluated.
So even though it’s kind of artificial, I’d like to work on this for the
next couple of times and ask you just to call feelings feelings, thoughts
thoughts, and evaluations evaluations. Just name them, so we’re clear
what it is we’re dealing with. Because they’ll blend themselves into the
object [holding up a coffee cup]. If we say, “This is a lousy cup,” it is as
if the “lousy” is in the cup. But wait a minute. If all living creatures were
gone from the planet, the cup is still there. What happened to “lousy”?
C: Right. It’s gone.
T: It’s not there.
C: [Pause] Oh man. I’m sort of getting a feeling like I’ve been hit, you know?
You’re talking about being in the moment. But the minute you assign a
value to something, you’re not in that moment anymore. I don’t know—
you put a label on something and decide whether that’s good or bad based
on your memories. Can you avoid doing that? If you can’t, can you ever
see it for what it is? I know that I’m doing evaluation all the time. I’m
thinking about this morning, being outside, “God it’s gorgeous outside; it’s
beautiful.” I’m starting to think about work and I could feel myself getting
worked up and it’s like, “I know that this is not productive. I don’t want
to be doing this.” I don’t have to be doing this, but my mind is down in
the rut and it’s like, “Okay, how can I change this?” [defusion]
T: Good.
C: I want to be enjoying walking, smelling the flowers, watching the kids,
all this kind of stuff. But then I come back to “I should be able to control
this,” and then you’re into this “I should” space and evaluation and
labeling myself.
T: That’s exactly right.
C: I’ve been going around in circles [defusion].
T: That’s beautiful. It’s neat. We need to work in here on doing something
other than going and letting Mr. Mind just completely dominate on the
one hand or trying to rein him in like a disciplinarian or something.
Because I don’t know how to do it. If you do, I’d be interested, but you
know, it’s like a very disobedient child. It’s just blabbing from morning
until night. You can yell at them and argue with them, but even that
doesn’t shut them up. So there’s got to be something else that we can do.
Do you want to do just a quick little exercise? Not a very long one. It’s
right on this point. Are you willing to?
C: Oh, sure.
C: I had this jerking back and forth between the person on the bank and
putting the thoughts on the leaves and letting them go.
T: Good.
C: There was some outside stimulus of some kind, and I would like to put
that on a leaf but I can’t. It’s like bam, bam, bam, bam, back and forth.
T: Okay.
C: It’s not just quiet and peaceful like it should be [avoidance].
T: Did you get it flowing for a little bit?
C: For sure, a little flowing and then boom, back to thinking and I’m gone.
T: What happened the second before you went back to thinking? Take me
through a sequence. It’s starting to flow, and then you do something. You
think something. Did you not?
C: I don’t know. I mean, I’ve been doing that exercise for years. I’ve tried to
let everything just be outside of you, but you can’t maintain that kind of
awareness for very long [avoidance; superficially this sounds like the point
of the exercise, but functionally he is trying to not have the thoughts].
T: Well, check this out and see if this is what happened: You get a thought
in there, and it’s starting to go by, and at some point you get hooked.
You might reflect on the structure of the exercise, for example. But that
thought doesn’t get on the leaf.
C: There are too many thoughts; they’re too fast.
T: That would be an example. But if we could just slow down that one
instant, when you think that it is not being looked at—it is being looked
from. Is that something like what happens?
C: yeah.
T: Okay. You can have a thought that is out here, one that you can notice,
or there is another way you can experience a thought. The other way is
more like you’re looking from something rather than looking at it. At the
moment that you are noticing that, you are having a thought; just at the
moment that you catch it, put that one out there and just let that one
flow by.
C: Gotcha.
T: Okay. Let’s do this again for a few moments. So let’s get back up on the
bank and a nice warm sun, shade from the tree, and we’ve got the brook
in front of us. Just allow a thought, whatever thought shows up, to be on
the leaf. If you find yourself thinking self-reflectively about what you’re
doing, put that on the leaf, gently.
C: I’m not getting any leaves at all, just chatter, chatter, chatter, chatter,
chatter.
T: As the chatter comes up, can you get it out?
C: Barely.
T: What’s some of the chatter? Give me an example.
C: Oh, I feel upset. I want to write this on the leaf. … I have a picture in
my mind of how my hand is doing it. … Isn’t that funny. … Backing up,
okay. … Feeling overwhelmed … this constant criticism of how I’m doing
… what I’m supposed to be doing [fusion, not present].
T: Good. Put that on a leaf.
C: Okay. I see it. Wouldn’t it be nice if I could do this all the time? I have
mental pictures of things, aside from what I’m thinking about … what I’m
seeing inside my head … and thinking about everything under the sun …
how my lids feel when they’re down instead of up … a constant barrage of
observation and evaluation. I’m putting each one out there [pause]. Is this
how I should be? [avoidance]
T: Cool. That’s great. You can come back now. That last one hooked you,
no? Check this out. Look and see. When you think, categorize, analyze,
interpret, plan, evaluate, and so on, when you “language” about or think
about things, all of that is happening in the present. It’s happening right
now in the same way that your heart’s beating. You’re breathing in and
out, right? If you go into its literal content, you get pulled away from just
seeing it. We don’t have a good language for that; it’s something like
buying a thought—operating from it. But it doesn’t mean believing it. If
you resist it—like disbelieve it, criticize it—it has the exact same effect.
Anything on this continuum, belief and disbelief, has the same effect.
Check this out; see if this isn’t something like what you were doing
when noticing your thoughts. At the point at which you were operating
on a literal basis of thought, the flow was gone. I mean you’re into
thoughtland, and the moment is categorized and evaluated. At the point
at which you can see it as an unfolding process, you can flow for a while.
Is that a fact?
C: I don’t understand what you’re saying. Are you saying that as you
conceptualize something, it’s just there, but if you analyze it, it’s suddenly
more huge and occupying more space? I don’t understand.
T: Just look around the room. You see things, right? At the instant that you
see them, it’s in the present, right? And it doesn’t have that quality of just
kind of getting pulled in; it’s just kind of a flow of individual events.
C: Mm-hmm. For sure.
T: As you look around the room, does it have the quality of a cacophony or
arguments in your head or like that?
C: No.
T: Right. It’s lots of different things when you look around, but it just kind
of flows along. When you get into your thoughts at one level it’s like that.
You’re seeing the visual stuff outside, but you also see thoughts inside. But
that’s the tiny part of the experience for most people, most of the time.
Most of it’s more like this kind of sense making. It doesn’t flow, it kind of
goes … boom, boom, boom, boom. It’s herky-jerky; it’s not in the present;
it’s somewhere else, sometime else. Figure it out. Evaluate it. Do it or not.
Believe it or disbelieve it. Are you with me?
C: Okay, yeah.
T: Okay, so what I want to get to is, were there any times in that exercise
that for just some moments the thoughts were just going by?
C: yes. For sure.
T: Okay. And could I ask this: when you were doing that, when you were
looking at the thoughts, could you still understand them, yes, even though
you weren’t looking from them? You weren’t buying them; you weren’t
arguing with them; you weren’t believing them in a literal sense.
C: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm. Yeah.
T: Okay. So that’s what I’m trying to get to. What pulls us out of this kind
of observer place—where you can see thoughts the same way you can
see objects in the room—to a place in which you can’t tell the difference
between a thought and yourself? It’s kind of like if you had plastic bubbles
that would fit down over your head, and if I put a red one on and I look
at the white wall, then the red paper on the white wall might look exactly
the same, it all looks like one thing. And then if I put a blue one on, it
would look different. You know, the red paper now is visible and the wall
just looks blue. It’s like that. Like when you take a thought and sort of
buy it, you don’t see it anymore. You see everything else from that filter.
C: That expression of seeing “from it” doesn’t quite fit yet. I’m not sure
where you’re coming from there. But I know there is a difference between
just letting thoughts happen and seeing them and then grabbing onto one
and chewing on it [acceptance, defusion].
T: Right.
C: And what makes that happen? I don’t know, but I’m guessing it’s because
that thought triggers your mind to ask, “Why did I have that thought,”
you know? Or “What does that say about me?” or “What should I
be doing about that thought?” It triggered a memory, an experience,
something like that. I think your mind is given to this, if not trained and
directed. It’s always relating, relating, relating, and trying to build on it
[defusion].
T: Right on.
C: Take it and do something with it.
T: Right.
C: Not, just let it happen.
T: Exactly. Exactly. Manipulate, analyze, categorize, change, figure out,
understand, exactly. And all of that requires some literal language. You
have to sort of buy the thought, you know, and take it seriously, in terms
of its literal content. But then it’s not just a process. Not “Now I’m
having this thought; now I’m having that thought.” Not something in the
present. Instead we are back in the war. What are you thinking, and can
you marshal evidence for it and against it? In problem-solving situations
there’s nothing wrong with that. I mean, that’s what it’s for. That’s what it
evolved for. But peace of mind? Forget it.
C: Right.
T: But most of its purposes originally were outside the skin. You know,
“How do I get warm in the winter.” Things like that. But now we’ve got
advanced enough that we’ve got it inside the skin and it’s “Am I happy?”
and “Do I belong here?” It includes all kinds of things that just don’t
have any business being involved in that. But you can’t keep it cordoned
off. Minds are like a smart-aleck kid that just will not shut up. Is there
anything in your experience that your mind isn’t happy to inform you of?
What’s right and wrong, good, bad, proper, improper. I mean, it knows
everything. Mr. Smarty Pants. I’ll give you an example. Do you know how
to touch your nose?
C: Sure.
T: Let me see. Okay. Glad to see that because I need to know how to do
that, okay? So, tell me how to touch my nose.
C: Well, one way you can touch your nose it to take one of your appendages
and put it in the vicinity of your nose and establish contact.
T: Okay, which one?
C: Whichever one you like.
T: Okay, I’m going to do this one over here.
C: Okay.
T: Okay, how do I do that?
C: Well, you’re going to have to put yourself in contact with your brain, and
it’s going to fire off things to your muscles that will make you lift your
arm and extend probably just one finger, and put that finger in contact
with your nose.
T: Okay. Now, how do I do that?
C: you have to tell your brain to do it.
T: Okay [pause]. It’s not working.
C: your brain isn’t working?
T: I’m telling my brain.
C: Tell your arm to lift.
T: Arm, I want you to lift. … I’m sorry, it’s not working.
C: [Chuckling] Maybe you ought to think about not touching your nose
right now.
T: Are you sure you know how to do this?
C: I know how to make it work for me, but I can’t make it work for you.
T: Why not?
C: Because it’s something that you have to deal with inside yourself. I can’t
get inside your skin.
T: Are you sure you know how to touch your nose?
C: For sure. I know how to make it work for me.
T: So how do I do it?
C: Keep practicing; practice makes perfect.
T: Do you see the problem? You know that stroke victims actually do that?
You’ve got a sixty-two-year-old lady who’s trying to recover from a stroke,
and they literally shout things like “Move, damn you!” My point on all
that is, minds will come up behind and claim everything: how to relate
to people, how to be happy, how to have a meaningful relationship.
Sometimes it’s just minds claiming credit for stuff that you’ve learned
other ways. You know, like your body knows how to do more than your
mind does.
C: Every once in a while there will be a situation that will happen, and
it’s like, “I don’t know what to do about this,” but somewhere inside me
there’s a feeling of “Just wait, this will work out,” and it does. Sometimes
I jump the gun and make it happen in some other way, but oftentimes
there will be a voice inside of me that says, “Don’t take action on this;
wait for something else to happen.” And that’s happened with little
things, big things, whatever. And it made me wonder about how do I have
that knowledge inside me? And why am I in some cases willing to trust it
and not in others? Could all kinds of things be happening that if I wasn’t
so damn preoccupied with trying to control and know everything, then
maybe I wouldn’t have to put out so much effort? [acceptance] And then
you consider that there’s all these portions of the brain that nobody has
any idea what they’re doing. But they’re there. But I don’t know any more
than I did five minutes ago [fusion].
T: Well, your mind probably doesn’t, but I’m working for you and not your
mind. I’m looking for weak spots here to see if I can get around it,
because this is not something that a mind can understand. We’re talking
about the limits of conscious stuff and seeing if we can find a place in
which some of the stuff can be moved off, thereby making some room
to do some other things. But they can’t work if Mr. Mind is in there
trying to do everything. The only way that we can work on this is with
language, but your mind also loves that. It’s listening, and of course it’s
trying to figure this out, everything that I am saying, which is fine, but
what I’m trying to talk about is something that is off that continuum
of belief, disbelief, evaluation, figuring out, and so on. So it’s a tricky
business. Even if we’re able to really make some progress here, your mind
will come back behind and say, “Oh, I understand; now it’s clear to
me what the point is.” And even if what it says is true, it’s functionally
false because you can’t do it that way. It’s like, “Oh, I know how to hit
a baseball.” And even if we have the mathematical formula showing
the curve the ball follows, if you try to hit it that way, you can’t hit it.
So it’s functionally false, even if it’s literally true. So, part of what we’re
doing here is just trying to figure out a way to put your mind in its place
without “minding” it into its place.
T: Would you mind doing two things? First, at least two times, for about five
minutes, do that sitting-on-the-side-of-the-stream deal at home. Just get
quiet and just watch your mind go. It may be very noisy. See if, as things
come up, you can gently put them out there and just keep doing it. And
if you lose it, when you notice you’ve lost it, then notice that’s a thought
and put it out there and see if you can note what hooked you moments
before.
C: For sure. I can do that. I’d like to see how it works if I try again actually
[acceptance].
T: The other thing I’d like to ask you to do is something a little different.
You’ll need twenty minutes to do this. There are only a couple of rules,
but one is, once you start, don’t stop, and go for twenty minutes. Get
yourself in a place that’s quiet and think of something sad or traumatic
that’s happened to you, especially something you haven’t processed much
or haven’t worked out very much. Get out a piece of paper and write
everything that comes to mind. Just let it flow. Write anything that comes
to mind. Notice what your body is doing, write emotions, other thoughts,
go wherever it occurs for you to go, and as you go, I want a part of you
to just kind of watch this happen. Just let it flow and take advantage of
it, especially if this is something you haven’t gone into much before. You
don’t have to bring the paper in; you can rip it up, tear it up, burn it
afterward, but just go through it and experience it as part of your history.
While trying to get into the depths of whatever is there as much as you
can, simply watch what shows up in the areas of thoughts, feelings, and
sensations. I don’t mean watching in order to defend yourself; I don’t
mean to disassociate. I mean, just notice yourself experiencing what
comes up as you do that. The exact opposite—stand back so you can see
it.
C: Gotcha.
